Title: A Hybrid Modeling Framework for Crop Prediction Tasks via Dynamic Parameter Calibration and Multi-Task Learning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.15411v1

Published Time: Tue, 17 Mar 2026 04:27:14 GMT

Number of Pages: 17

Markdown Content:
# A Hybrid Modeling Framework for Crop Prediction Tasks via Dynamic Parameter Calibration and Multi-Task Learning 

# William Solow 1 , Paola Pesantez-Cabrera 2 , Markus Keller 2 , Lav Khot 2 , Sandhya Saisubramanian 1 , Alan Fern 11Oregon State University 

> 2

# Washington State University 

# {soloww, sandhya.sai, afern }@oregonstate.edu, {p.pesantezcabrera, mkeller, lav.khot }@wsu.edu 

# Abstract 

Accurate prediction of crop states (e.g., phenol-ogy stages and cold hardiness) is essential for timely farm management decisions such as irriga-tion, fertilization, and canopy management to opti-mize crop yield and quality. While traditional bio-physical models can be used for season-long pre-dictions, they lack the precision required for site-specific management. Deep learning methods are a compelling alternative, but can produce biologi-cally unrealistic predictions and require large-scale data. We propose a hybrid modeling approach that uses a neural network to parameterize a differen-tiable biophysical model and leverages multi-task learning for efficient data sharing across crop cul-tivars in data limited settings. By predicting the 

parameters of the biophysical model, our approach improves the prediction accuracy while preserving biological realism. Empirical evaluation using real-world and synthetic datasets demonstrates that our method improves prediction accuracy by 60% for phenology and 40% for cold hardiness compared to deployed biophysical models. 

# 1 Introduction 

Accurate forecasts of crop states are critical for growers to schedule time-sensitive farm operations such as cold stress mitigation, pruning, fertilization, irrigation, and harvesting for specialty crops [Keller et al. , 2016; Milani and Cawley, 2024; Rogiers et al. , 2022]. However, accurate crop state prediction is challenging due to (1) limited availability of his-torical data for per-cultivar calibration and sparse observa-tions during each growing season [Zapata et al. , 2017], and (2) the need to accurately model complex relationships be-tween daily weather features and crop states [Guralnick et al. , 2024]. Existing approaches to this crop state prediction problem typically fall into two categories: mechanistic bio-physical models and data-driven deep learning approaches. Historically, biophysical models have been used to model a variety of crop states, such as phenology (timing of each de-velopmental stage) and cold-hardiness (tolerance to low tem-peratures). Phenology is modeled by the Growing Degree Day (GDD) biophysical model based on daily accumulated heat units [Parker et al. , 2013]. Cold hardiness models pre-dict the lethal bud temperature as a function of air tempera-ture and phenological stage [Ferguson et al. , 2011]. Despite research supporting that crop states depend on exogenous weather features [Greer et al. , 2006], most specialty crop models only use air temperature as input, limiting their ex-pressiveness [Badeck et al. , 2004]. Further, current biophysi-cal models do not capture temporal nuances, such as how var-ied chilling hours in winter can change dormancy release and phenological development [Keller and Tarara, 2010]). These limitations affect their ability to produce accurate medium range (7-14 day) forecasts of the crop state [Reynolds, 2022]. Deep learning offers a compelling alternative to biophys-ical modeling due to its ability to model complex, nonlin-ear, and temporal relationships between weather variables and crop physiological states. However, purely data-driven models typically require large datasets and often produce bi-ologically unrealistic predictions that violate known physio-logical constraints on plant development, such as predicting bud break after flowering. This makes them unsuitable for actionable medium range forecasts [Saxena et al. , 2023a]. To address the limitations of both deep learning and bio-physical modeling for crop state forecasting tasks, we present a hybrid approach that uses a recurrent network to dynam-ically refine the parameters of a differentiable biophysical crop model, based on daily weather (Figure 1). For example, given historical weather data and phenology observations, the network is trained to assign the base temperature for heat ac-cumulation in the GDD model such that the calibrated GDD model can accurately predict various phenological stages at deployment time. To address limited per-cultivar data, we use multi-task learning [Caruana, 1997] to share information across cultivars and improve prediction accuracy. While hybrid modeling techniques have been successfully applied to a variety of physical processes [Jia et al. , 2021; Cai et al. , 2021], they remain underexplored for crop state tasks. Prior hybrid methods often approximate portions of the biophysical model [Van Bree et al. , 2025] or predict residu-als [Vijayshankar et al. , 2021]. In contrast, our approach pre-dicts parameters of the biophysical model, thereby producing biologically realistic and more accurate predictions. 

Scope, Contributions, and Track Relevance This work is motivated by the operational needs of our primary              

> arXiv:2603.15411v1 [cs.AI] 16 Mar 2026 Dormant BudBreak Bloom Veraison
> Jan -Apr Apr -July July -Sept
> Pretrained RNN selects daily parameters
> of GDD model ( e.g. Temp. Sum for Bloom)
> GDD Model
> Stage Predictions
> Weather
> Data
> Vineyard Management
> Operations
> Deploy frost
> mitigation
> Targeted water
> stress
> Schedule labor
> for harvest
> Apply
> fertilizer
> What vineyard
> operations to
> prepare for?
> Seasonal Phenological
> Stages Dynamic Model
> Calibration
> Pretrained
> RNN Dormant
> Bud Break
> Veraison
> Bloom
> Day 1
> …
> Day T -1
> Day T

Figure 1: Overview of our proposed method using phenology prediction as an example. In this case, seasonal phenological stages guide vineyard management operations. Our Dynamic Model Calibration via Multi-Task Learning (DMC-MTL) approach uses a pretrained neural network and biophsyical model to produce high fidelity and biologically realistic phenology state forecasts. The pretrained RNN produces daily parameter predictions (Base Temperature, Temperature Sum for Bud Break, etc.) of the Growing Degree Day (GDD) phenology model which handles the daily stage prediction. 

stakeholders—specialty crop growers in the Pacific North-west (PNW) of the United States who face increasing risks from weather variability and climate stress [Reynolds, 2022]. In this region, over $10 billion in annual specialty-crop pro-duction depends on timely and accurate crop state forecasts, including phenology and cold hardiness [Knowling et al. ,2021]. Our team includes AI experts and agricultural domain experts who played key roles in data collection, selection of biophysical models, and system deployment. While our framework is broadly applicable to other crops, the paper focuses on wine grapes as a representative specialty crop and studies two critical crop states: phenology and cold hardiness . We train and validate our models using grape data collected in the PNW region between 1988-2025. Our primary contributions are: (1) presenting a novel hy-brid approach for accurate crop state forecasting by refin-ing parameters of the biophysical model conditioned on the weather features; (2) formulating the crop state prediction problem as a multi-task learning problem that leverages data efficiently across grape cultivars; (3) presenting an in-season adaptation variant of our model; and (4) empirical evaluations using real-world and synthetic datasets that demonstrate our approach’s robustness and increased accuracy over state-of-the-art biophysical baselines, deep learning approaches, and hybrid models. Our model has recently been deployed on Ag-WeatherNet [WSU, 2025] with over 26000 registered grow-ers. 

# 2 Background and Related Work 

Hybrid Modeling of Biophysical Processes Hybrid mod-eling combines deep learning and mechanistic modeling to obtain increasingly accurate and interpretable models of bio-physical processes [Willard et al. , 2023]. Physics-Informed Neural Networks (PINNs) [Raissi et al. , 2019] encode bio-logical constraints in the form of partial differential equations into neural networks [Karpatne et al. , 2017] enabling more accurate and biologically realistic predictions [Karniadakis et al. , 2021]. In addition to PINNs, residual error hybrid mod-els use a deep learning model to predict the difference be-tween the true observation and the biophysical model predic-tion [de Mattos Neto et al. , 2022]. Process replacement hy-brid models [Wang et al. , 2023] replace a poorly understood aspects of the biophysical model with a neural network with wide applications to the natural sciences [Feng et al. , 2022; Shen et al. , 2023]. Table 1 summarizes the characteristics of these models along different desiderate for crop state fore-casting tasks. Another related work is that of Unagar et al. (2021) that use reinforcement learning for parameter cal-ibration of a lithium battery. However, their problem setting assumes that the next true state of the system is known, which is untrue in our problem setting where medium range fore-casts are needed. We adopt a supervised learning approach and train a network to dynamically modulate the parameters of the biophysical model in response to input features, en-abling medium horizon forecasts. 

Multi-Task Learning When a set of tasks share similar structure, the multi-task learning [Zhang and Yang, 2018] framework can be used to efficiently aggregate data across tasks. Hard parameter sharing methods share a common set of hidden layers with unique prediction heads while soft pa-rameter sharing methods learn unique models but regularize weight updates to keep models similar [Ruder, 2017]. Shared embedding spaces [Caruana, 1997] and task-specific embed-dings [Changpinyo et al. , 2018] are viable methods for encod-ing task-specific information. We empirically evaluate these approaches in data-limited setting across genetically diverse grape cultivars treated as separate tasks, assessing prediction accuracy for all cultivars. 

Machine Learning for Crop State Forecasts Saxena et al. (2023a) applied multi-task learning to grape bud break prediction using a classification model. However, this model made erroneous predictions (e.g., predicting the onset of dor-mancy after bud break) that were inconsistent with biological processes. Saxena et al. (2023b) framed the grape cold hardi-Modeling Approach Biologically Realistic Exogenous Features Temporal Info. Biophysical Model ✓ ✗ ✗                    

> Deep Learning ✗✓✓
> PINN Sometimes ✓✓
> Residual Sometimes ✓✓
> Process Replacement ✓✗✗
> DMC-MTL (Ours) ✓✓✓
> Table 1: Modeling approaches for crop state forecasting tasks eval-uated along different desiderata. PINN, Residual, Process Replace-ment, and DMC-MTL are all hybrid models. Biologically realistic
> means the model predictions reflect biological laws. Exogenous fea-tures means that the model output can be conditioned on additional weather features. Temporal info. indicates that the model can lever-age historical input in addition to what the biophysical model uses.

ness prediction problem as a multi-task learning problem and used a recurrent neural network (RNN) to improve predic-tion accuracy over the deployed Ferguson biophysical model for cold hardiness [Ferguson et al. , 2014], demonstrating ef-ficacy of multi-task learning to leverage data across cultivars. Van Bree et al. (2025) proposed a process replacement hy-brid model for bloom date in cherry trees by approximating the temperature response function in the GDD model with a neural network. However, their method did not consider the effect of exogenous weather features on phenology nor the temporal variation of heat accumulation. In contrast, our method leverages a RNN to both encode temporal and ex-ogenous weather information to avoid these limitations, and demonstrates state of the art performance in predicting grape phenology and matches grape cold hardiness while producing biologically realistic forecasts. 

# 3 Dynamic Model Calibration 

Our problem setting and approach, Dynamic Model 

Calibration with Multi-Task Learning (DMC-MTL), is in-spired by the following observations and hypotheses: (1) crop state prediction tasks are similar across cultivars, motivating our multi-task approach; (2) the parameters of crop state pre-diction models are hypothesized to vary over time based on historical weather in addition to the daily average tempera-ture; and (3) crop state forecasting requires biologically real-istic and accurate predictions. 

Problem Formulation We formulate the problem of esti-mating dynamic parameters of a biophysical model as a time series supervised learning problem and adopt the multi-task setting. Let Mω denote the biophysical model with parame-ters ω. Let Di be the set of observed weather and daily crop states for each crop cultivar i. Let Si,k be the k-th season in 

Di with Si,k = {W0, Y 0, . . . , W T , Y T } where Wt is the ob-served weather feature vector and Yt is the observed crop state on day t. Given W ′ 

> t

⊂ Wt as input, Mω predicts a crop state 

Y ′ 

> t

. We train a multi-task recurrent neural network model Fθ

that takes Wt and cultivar i.d. i as input, and outputs daily pa-rameters ωt of M. The resulting parameterized model Mωt ,along with W ′ 

> t

, is used to generate crop state predictions Y ′ 

> t

.Given time series input Si,k , we use Fθ and M to obtain a se-ℳ!! ℳ!"

ℱ" ℱ"

𝑊 #’ 𝑌 $’ 𝑊 %&$’

𝜔 # 𝜔 %

𝐻 # 𝐻 $ 𝐻 %&$ 𝐻 %

(𝑖 , 𝑊 #)

𝑌 %’…

…

(𝑖 , 𝑊 %&$)                 

> Figure 2: Network architecture of our approach DMC-MTL. The multi-task RNN ( Fθ) sequentially embeds cultivar i.d. iand con-catenates it with the daily weather features Wtto predict a parame-terization ωtof the biophysical model M. Using the weather input to the biophysical model W′
> tand the daily parameterization ωt, crop state forecasts Y′
> t. . . Y ′
> t+kcan be generated.

quence of parameter estimates ω0, . . . ω T and corresponding crop state predictions Y ′ 

> 0

, . . . , Y ′ 

> T

(Figure 2). 

3.1 Model Architecture 

The proposed model architecture for DMC-MTL is com-prised of three parts: the RNN-backbone, the multi-task model, and the parameterization of the biophysical model. The RNN-backbone ( fθ ) contains two linear layers, fol-lowed by a Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) [Chung et al. , 2014], and another linear layer. To support multi-task learning across cultivars, we define Fθ which adds a linear embedding layer before fθ . This embedding layer converts a one-hot en-coding of the cultivar into a dense vector, which is concate-nated with the daily weather feature vector Wt and passed to 

fθ , allowing the model to incorporate cultivar-specific infor-mation [Saxena et al. , 2023b]. ReLU activations are used, ex-cept for the final layer where a tanh activation is applied. The output of Fθ , which is in the range [−1, 1] , is then rescaled to match the parameter ranges of the biophysical model M

(more details in Appendix A ). Figure 2 shows the daily parameterization ωt of the bio-physical model M, the core of our DMC-MTL approach. Fθ

makes causal parameter predictions by sequentially process-ing a weather data sequence W0, . . . , W T , generating corre-sponding parameters ωt at each time step. These parameters are used to parameterize Mωt and along with W ′ 

> t

, to produce phenology prediction Y ′

> t+1

.

Biophysical Model Implementation To learn Fθ , the bio-physical model M must be differentiable and implemented in a framework that supports gradient backpropagation. In practice, most specialty crop state models are relatively sim-ple and do not require advanced ordinary differential equa-tion solvers. We additionally modify each biophysical model so that the parameters can be updated daily by Fθ before each integration step. Parameters for the biophysical mod-els are known to lie in specified ranges. To retain the abil-ity of the DMC-MTL approach to capture complex depen-dencies among weather features, we choose large ranges for each parameter. See Appendix B for details of the biophysical models, converting a biophysical model into a differentiable framework, and the parameter ranges we consider. 4 Extending DMC-MTL: In-Season Tuning 

Collecting sufficient historical data for training accurate DMC-MTL models is challenging and often requires many years. In the case of insufficient data, it is beneficial to train the DMC-MTL model with available data and then adjust the model parameters based on in-season observations made by growers in the field. To enable in-season adaptation, er-ror signals are generated by comparing DMC-MTL model predictions with sparse in-season observations such as occa-sional measurements of bud stage or cold hardiness. These error signals are then used to adjust future predictions of bio-physical model parameters within the same growing season. This continual recalibration reduces bias accumulation seen in static prediction models and improves prediction accuracy. When in-season observations are available, the daily pa-rameter predictions made by the DMC-MTL approach are adjusted by using an additional neural network conditioned on error signals (Figure 3). While such Error Encoding Networks (EENs) have been used for video frame predic-tion [Henaff et al. , 2017], they have not been explored for the 

sparse and low-dimensional error signals available in crop state tasks. Furthermore, EENs have not previously been ap-plied to hybrid models, so we investigate their effectiveness in reducing in-season predictive error and recalibrating the hy-brid DMC-MTL model at small-to-medium horizon lengths. 

Model Architecture We use an EEN with the same model architecture as DMC-MTL ( Fθ ) given that observations are sparse and different cultivars may exhibit different error pat-terns. At each time step t the DMC-MTL model makes a prediction. If an in-season observation is available, the dif-ference between the observation Yt and model prediction Y ′

> t

is passed to the EEN. If no observation is available, the EEN input is zero. This is consistent with the observation that if the DMC-MTL model makes no error, then the EEN should not change the future model predictions of the biophysical model parameters. We accomplish this by setting the bias terms within the EEN network layers to zero. EEN param-eter predictions are combined additively with the predicted parameters by the pretrained DMC-MTL and then passed to the biophysical model to predict the next crop state. 

Training EENs Training the In-Season Adaptation model is a two step process. First, a DMC-MTL model is trained to predict parameters of the biophysical model that best predict the observed crop state. Then, the weights of the pretrained RNN Fθ are frozen while the EEN is trained. The EEN is trained using the same training data as DMC-MTL, under the assumption that part of the observed crop state cannot be predicted solely by the weather and cultivar i.d. [Henaff 

et al. , 2017]. We use the historical crop state observations to mimic the availability of in-season observations in real time. We randomly mask available observations to ensure that the EEN does not learn rely on frequent observations for medium range forecasts, which may not be available at deployment time (more details in Appendix A.2 ). 

# 5 Experiment Setup 

The performance of our proposed DMC-MTL approach is evaluated on two key criteria: (1) accurate and biologically Pretrained RNN selects daily parameters    

> of GDD model, modified by EEN
> GDD Model
> Sparse Crop
> State
> Observation
> Pretrained
> RNN
> EEN
> Weather
> Data
> (𝑖 ,Error :[Obs .–Pred .])

# ⊕  

> Figure 3: In-Season Adaptation with DMC-MTL. Cultivar id iand error between observed and DMC-MTL predicted crop states are passed to the EEN. The parameters predicted by the EEN are com-bined additively to the prediction made by DMC-MTL’s pretrained RNN before parameterizing the biophyiscal model.

realistic seasonal predictions and (2) efficient data use across cultivars. We also considered (3) how in-season data can be used to reduce prediction error and (4) robustness to unex-pected subseasonal weather patterns, which can be demon-strated by evaluating a model on different weather distribu-tion. Based on these, we design our experiments to answer the following research questions: 

Q1 : (a) How does the average seasonal accuracy of DMC-MTL compare to deployed biophysical, deep learning and hybrid models? (b) Are predictions biologically re-alistic? 

Q2 : (a) Does DMC-MTL leverage data efficiently across cul-tivars? (b) How much per-cultivar data is required? 

Q3 : Do in-season crop state observations improve DMC-MTL model predictions? 

Q4 : Does DMC-MTL exhibit robustness to different weather conditions compared to other baselines? 

Q5 : What percentage of cultivars are accurately predicted by each model type? 

5.1 Datasets 

Real-World Datasets We use the grape phenology and cold hardiness of 32 grape cultivars collected between 1988-2025. Phenology (stages of bud break, bloom, and veraison) was observed daily during the non-dormant season, and cold hardiness was measured weekly, biweekly, or monthly during the dormancy season. There are between eight and 21 years of phenological data per cultivar, and between four and 27 years of cold hardiness data per cultivar (43 to 797 samples). Pertinent historical open field weather data is sourced from AgWeatherNet [WSU, 2025]. Appendix C includes a detailed description of the dataset and our data processing procedure. Processed real-world data will be made available upon paper acceptance; AgWeatherNet data is open-source. 

Synthetic Datasets To explore the robustness of DMC-MTL to different weather conditions, we generated datasets with two biophysical crop models: (1) the GDD model with 31 cultivars [Solow et al. , 2025], and (2) the Ferguson cold hardiness model with 20 cultivars [Ferguson et al. , 2011]. We Solution Approaches Grape Phenology Grape Cold Hardiness                                                                                

> Q1a: DMC-MTL (Ours) 7.63 ±3.56 1.21 ±0.39
> Bio. Model (Deployed) 18.58 ±5.03 ∗2.03 ±0.39 ∗
> Bio. Model (Gradient Descent) 12.21 ±5.13 ∗1.88 ±0.42 ∗
> Deep-MTL 8.16 ±4.20 ∗1.30 ±0.46 TempHybrid 9.84 ±4.35 ∗3.45 ±0.98 ∗
> PINN 8.61 ±4.32 ∗1.30 ±0.43 Residual Hybrid 15.01 ±6.00 ∗1.49 ±0.52 ∗
> Q2:
> DMC-STL 9.57 ±3.79 ∗1.62 ±0.34 ∗
> DMC-Agg 9.81 ±4.70 ∗1.51 ±0.70 ∗
> DMC-MTL-Mult 11.97 ±4.43 ∗1.57 ±0.53 ∗
> DMC-MTL-Add 8.42 ±3.56 ∗1.26 ±0.41 DMC-MTL-MultiH 8.20 ±4.15 ∗1.34 ±0.48 ∗
> Table 2: The average seasonal error (RMSE in days for phenology and ◦Cfor cold hardiness) over all cultivars and five seeds in the testing set for grape phenology and cold hardiness. DMC-MTL is compared against two optimization procedures for the biophysical model, a deep learning approach, three hybrid models, and two DMC variants. Best-in-class results are reported in bold. A ∗indicates that DMC-MTL yields a statistically significant improvement (p < 0.05 ) using the paired t-test relative to the corresponding baseline.

used historical weather data from the NASAPower database for Washington, USA [NASA, 2025]. We also generated phe-nology and cold hardiness observations from Vermont, Cal-ifornia, and Oregon, USA. For each biophysical model, we generated ten years of data per cultivar using the biophysi-cal models and historical NASA weather data. We randomly masked 88% of the daily cold hardiness samples to resemble the real-world dataset. We include code to generate this data. 

5.2 Baselines, Training and Evaluation 

Baselines We consider 11 baselines for our experiments: (1) Deployed biophysical model —the GDD model for phe-nology and the Ferguson model for cold hardiness that are used by our stakeholders; (2) Gradient Descent on the bio-physical model parameters. To the best of our knowledge, this baseline has not been used before because the crop models have not been written in a differentiable framework; (3) Tem-pHybrid —a hybrid model proposed by Van Bree et al. (2025) and adapted to the cold hardiness setting; (4) Deep-MTL —a multi-task model that either predicts probabilities for each phenological stage, or a continuous approximation of the cold hardiness. Instead of a tanh activation, there was a single out-put feature with no activation function. For cold hardiness we used the regression model proposed by Saxena et al. (2023b); (5) PINN —a Physics-informed neural network (PINN) with the same architecture and activation as the Deep-MTL model, trained with an additional loss term to weight biologically realistic predictions [Aawar et al. , 2025]; (6) Residual Hy-brid —a hybrid model that uses an RNN to predict the dif-ference between the biophysical model predictions and the observed crop state with the same network architecture as the Deep-MTL model [Vijayshankar et al. , 2021]; (7) DMC-STL —a DMC model without the embedding layer, trained on a per-cultivar basis; (8) DMC-Agg —a DMC model with-out the embedding layer and trained on all unlabeled cultivar data; (9) DMC-MTL-Mult —a DMC-MTL variant that uses a multiplicative embedding; (10) DMC-MTL-Add —a DMC-MTL variant that uses an additive embedding; (11) DMC-MTL-MultiH —a DMC-MTL variant that uses per-task pre-diction heads. See Appendix A for additional details. Baselines 1-6 to evaluate the efficacy of our approach against the biophysical, hybrid and deep learning baselines. Baselines 7-11 evaluate the efficacy of multi-task learning. 

Model Training Protocol For all experiments, we split the available grape cultivar data into training and testing sets. To build the test set, we withheld two seasons of data per cultivar from the training set. For the cultivars with the least amount of data, this resulted in two years of data in both the training and testing sets. Hyperparameters were selected using a vali-dation set consisting of one season per cultivar. See Appendix D for more details on hyperparameter selection. Every model was trained for 400 epochs using a learning rate of 0.0002. We decreased the learning rate by a factor of 0.9 after a 10 epoch plateau of the training loss. For the deep learning phenology model we used Cross Entropy loss and used PINN loss for the PINN hybrid model with p =0.5. For all other models, we used the mean squared error loss function, masking days that did not have a ground truth observation. We provide our code base here: https://tinyurl. com/IRAS-DMC-MTL. 

Evaluation Protocol We trained each model five times with different data splits and reported the average root mean squared error (RMSE) across cultivars on the test sets. For phenology, the RMSE was the cumulative error in days over the predictions for bud break, bloom, and veraison. For cold hardiness we reported the RMSE in degrees Celsius over all unmasked samples during the testing year. 

# 6 Results and Discussion 

Q1a: Average Performance of DMC-MTL Table 7 shows the average RMSE values for grape phenology and cold har-diness predictions using different approaches, across 32 cul-tivars. The results show that DMC-MTL dramatically out-performed the biophysical models that are currently used by growers in PNW region—the GDD model for phenology and Ferguson model for cold hardiness. DMC-MTL also im-proved over gradient descent optimization for both phenol-ogy and cold hardiness. These results indicate the importance of better optimization procedures for crop model calibration, Figure 4: DMC-MTL, Classification, and Regression model predic-tions for (a) grape phenology and (b) grape cold hardiness. DMC-MTL makes biologically realistic predictions while deep learning model predictions do not always respect biologicaly laws. 

and how DMC-MTL can improve upon standard practices. Further, DMC-MTL improved upon the Deep-MTL, Tem-pHybrid, PINN, and Residual Hybrid models, demonstrating the importance of dynamic parameterization, inclusion of ex-ogenous weather features, and temporal information. We per-formed the paired t-test aggregated over all cultivars to con-firm when our DMC-MTL performance improvements were statistically significant (p < 0.05) . Overall, our results indi-cate that our hybrid modeling approach is more accurate and reliable for predicting crop state tasks. 

Q1b: Biological Realism Biologically realistic predic-tions are critical for interpreting medium-range forecasts that growers rely on to plan their vineyard operations. Figure 4 shows that Deep-MTL model incorrectly predicts bloom, re-verts to bud break, then re-enters bloom three days later. Sim-ilarly, for cold hardiness, Deep-MTL overestimates the bio-logically plausible cold hardiness early in the growing season. In contrast, our DMC-MTL consistently makes biologically realistic crop state predictions. 

Q2a: Multi-Task Data Sharing Results in Table 7 show that DMC-MTL outperforms DMC-STL and DMC-Agg, demonstrating that both single-task learning and naive aggre-gation are insufficient for these crop state prediction tasks. Other implementations of multi-task learning (DMC-MTL-Mult/Add/MultiH) exhibited lower prediction accuracy com-pared to DMC-MTL. These results demonstrate that our learned one-hot concatenation embedding approach best en-coded task-specific information, thereby efficiently leverag-ing data between cultivars. Additional results in Appendix E .

Q2b: DMC-MTL Data Requirements To evaluate the per-cultivar data requirements of DMC-MTL and compare its data efficiency to other models, we vary the number of seasons of available per-cultivar data from one to 15 during training. Our results in Figure 5 show that the average er-ror decreases across all model types, as more data becomes available. While biophysical models seem to perform better in the low data regime, the deep models perform better with more data. In contrast, DMC-MTL outperforms both meth-ods across the entire range of data sizes. 

> Figure 5: The performance of DMC-MTL models compared to deep learning and biophysical models under limited per-cultivar training data for grape phenology (Pheno) and cold hardiness (CH). Results are averaged over five seeds using the same two-seasons-per-cultivar evaluation sets.
> Figure 6: Performance of the base DMC-MTL with increasing per-cultivar data compared to the performance of the DMC-MTL with the additional in-season adaptation training for grape phenology (Pheno) and cold hardiness (CH). Results averaged over five seeds.

Q3: In-Season Adaptation with In-Field Observations 

We evaluate the in-season adaptation with that of DMC-MTL, by incorporating real-time in-field data. Using the same train-ing data and protocol as the DMC-MTL models, we trained the in-season adaptation models with increasing amounts of per-cultivar data. Figure 6 shows their performance on the same testing data. By using the in-season observations to re-fine parameters predicted by the DMC-MTL model, the EEN yields the most benefit where DMC-MTL prediction errors are highest (the most data-limited settings). With only one season of data per cultivar, in-season adaptation reduces error by over 25%, enabling more actionable forecasts. As DMC-MTL accuracy improves when additional data is available during training, the benefit of the EEN diminishes, indicat-ing that in-season adaptation is most valuable when historical per-cultivar data is scarce. 

Q4: Robustness to Differing Weather Conditions Cur-rent crop models are calibrated on a site specific basis, lim-iting their applicability to regions with sufficient historical data. Further, they assume that weather conditions will re-main consistent and do not account for extreme weather events which is critical for broader adoption. To evaluate our approach’s robustness to varying weather conditions, we Phenology cold hardiness Approach WA (Train Loc.) VT CA OR WA (Train Loc.) VT CA OR DMC-MTL 5.9 ± 2.7 8.8 ± 5.6 30.4 ± 9.3 17.7 ± 0.5 0.42 ± 0.28 0.76 ± 0.31 1.37 ± 0.16 3.59 ± 0.24 Deep-MTL 6.1 ± 3.0 96.2 ± 10.8 120. ± 1.4 78.0 ± 1.9 0.34 ± 0.22 5.98 ± 1.57 6.01 ± 0.07 3.73 ± 0.46 PINN 5.3 ± 2.9 60.5 ± 14.2 59.8 ± 1.3 58.4 ± 3.9 0.39 ± 0.23 4.86 ± 1.41 8.38 ± 0.25 4.02 ± 0.40 TempHybrid 6.4 ± 5.2 97.3 ± 16.2 118. ± 20. 83.0 ± 18. 4.25 ± 0.98 5.60 ± 0.98 8.57 ± 1.14 6.43 ± 1.33 Table 3: RMSE (days and ◦C) for grape phenology and cold hardiness respectively, evaluated on unseen data sampled from the training location (WA) and from locations with a moderately similar weather (Vermont, California, and Oregon). Results averaged over five seeds.   

> Figure 7: Screenshot of the publicly accessible user interface on AgWeatherNet. The weather station-specific phenology forecasts during the 2025 season for the Cabernet Sauvignon cultivar of the Zapata (GDD-based biophysical model) are compared with the hy-brid (DMC-MTL) model.

trained models on synthetic data from Washington, USA, and evaluated them on data from Vermont, Oregon, and Califor-nia, which have moderately similar weather patterns. Exper-iments were performed using synthetic phenology and cold hardiness datasets. Table 3 shows the cumulative RMSE in days on the Washington test set and Vermont, Oregon, and California test sets. While all models performed similar on the Washington test set, deep learning and other hybrid mod-els produced large errors on the Vermont, Oregon, and Cal-ifornia test sets. In contrast, DMC-MTL had a marginal in-crease in error on the test set, demonstrating robustness to varying weather conditions and its ability to produce usable predictions in unseen weather conditions. 

Q5: Accuracy of Per-Cultivar Predictions While DMC-MTL substantially reduces prediction error compared to bio-physical models, its practical adoption depends on growers’ error tolerance. To assess the potential model use, we evalu-ate the proportion of cultivars with RMSE below predefined thresholds, reflecting varying tolerance levels. We vary the RMSE tolerance threshold in the range [0 , 2.5] for cold har-diness and [0 , 30] for phenology. Our results in Figure 8 show that DMC-MTL consistenly performs better than the baselines for both phenology and cold hardiness. In addi-tion, DMC-MTL’s biologically realistic predictions position its medium range forecasts to be predicted unambiguously, positioning it to be widely used in the field. 

> Figure 8: Percentage of all cultivars with cumulative error below a given RMSE threshold modeling a grape grower’s tolerance for model prediction error. Results are reported over five seeds for (a) phenology and (b) cold hardiness.

# 7 Deployment of DMC-MTL Models 

DMC-MTL models for grape phenology were recently de-ployed on AgWeatherNet [WSU, 2025] for the 2026 grow-ing season. Figure 7 is a screenshot of the user interface visible to growers, showing our model predictions for a spe-cific weather station and grape cultivar (Cabernet Sauvignon) and that of the Zapata model (a GDD-based model that we compared against in Table 7) [Zapata et al. , 2017]. Stake-holders in the PNW widely use AgWeatherNet and will have access to both DMC-MTL and biophysical model forecasts to inform their vineyard operations which we will monitor for long-term impact. Continued analysis of deployed DMC-MTL models will provide insights to viticulturists on our in-terdisciplinary team to better understand the shortcomings of deployed biophysical models and improve understanding of grape phenological development. 

# 8 Conclusion and Future Work 

We present a novel deep learning method that predicts the pa-rameters of biophysical models. Our results show that lever-aging the benefits of both deep network architecture and bio-physical models can outperform both methods individually. In very data-limited settings, our in-season adaptation method provides growers with a more accurate prediction tool that is especially beneficial when waiting for more data is not feasi-ble. Future work will aim to develop uncertainty quantifica-tion methods for crop state tasks through our hybrid modeling framework. Acknowledgments 

The authors thank Lynn Mills and Zilia Khaliullina at the Irri-gated Agriculture Research and Extension Center (IAREC), Washington State University, for their invaluable support in collecting and sharing grape phenology data. The authors would also like to thank Sanjita Bhavirisetty, Jaitun Patel, and Dheeraj Vurukuti for their assistance in the deployment of DMC-MTL phenology models on AgWeatherNet. This research was supported by USDA NIFA award No. 2021-67021-35344 (AgAID AI Institute). 

# References 

[Aawar et al. , 2025] Majd Al Aawar, Srikar Mutnuri, Man-sooreh Montazerin, and Ajitesh Srivastava. Dynamics-Based Feature Augmentation of Graph Neural Networks for Variant Emergence Prediction. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 39, pages 27793–27801, April 2025. [Allen, 1994] P. Geoffrey Allen. Economic forecasting in agriculture. International Journal of Forecasting ,10(1):81–135, June 1994. [Badeck et al. , 2004] Franz-W. Badeck, Alberte Bondeau, Kristin B¨ ottcher, Daniel Doktor, Wolfgang Lucht, J¨ org Schaber, and Stephen Sitch. Responses of spring phenol-ogy to climate change. New Phytologist , 162(2):295–309, 2004. [Cai et al. , 2021] Shengze Cai, Zhicheng Wang, Sifan Wang, Paris Perdikaris, and George Em Karniadakis. Physics-Informed Neural Networks for Heat Transfer Problems. 

Journal of Heat Transfer , 143(060801), April 2021. [Caruana, 1997] Rich Caruana. Multitask Learning. Ma-chine Learning , 28(1):41–75, July 1997. [Changpinyo et al. , 2018] Soravit Changpinyo, Hexiang Hu, and Fei Sha. Multi-Task Learning for Sequence Tagging: An Empirical Study. In International Conference on Com-putational Linguistics , August 2018. [Chung et al. , 2014] Junyoung Chung, Caglar Gulcehre, KyungHyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. Empirical Evalu-ation of Gated Recurrent Neural Networks on Sequence Modeling. In NIPS 2014 Workshop on Deep Learning and Representation Learning , December 2014. [de Mattos Neto et al. , 2022] Paulo S. G. de Mattos Neto, George D. C. Cavalcanti, Domingos S. de O. Santos J´ unior, and Eraylson G. Silva. Hybrid systems using resid-ual modeling for sea surface temperature forecasting. Sci-entific Reports , 12(1):487, January 2022. [Feng et al. , 2022] Dapeng Feng, Jiangtao Liu, Kathryn Lawson, and Chaopeng Shen. Differentiable, Learn-able, Regionalized Process-Based Models With Multi-physical Outputs can Approach State-Of-The-Art Hydro-logic Prediction Accuracy. Water Resources Research ,58(10):e2022WR032404, 2022. [Ferguson et al. , 2011] John C. Ferguson, Julie M. Tarara, Lynn J. Mills, Gary G. Grove, and Markus Keller. Dy-namic thermal time model of cold hardiness for dormant grapevine buds. Annals of Botany , 107(3):389, January 2011. [Ferguson et al. , 2014] John C. Ferguson, Michelle M. Moyer, Lynn J. Mills, Gerrit Hoogenboom, and Markus Keller. Modeling Dormant Bud Cold Hardiness and Bud-break in Twenty-Three Vitis Genotypes Reveals Variation by Region of Origin. American Journal of Enology and Viticulture , 65(1):59–71, March 2014. [Greer et al. , 2006] Dennis H. Greer, Jens N. W¨ unsche, Cara L. Norling, and Harry N. Wiggins. Root-zone tem-peratures affect phenology of bud break, flower cluster de-velopment, shoot extension growth and gas exchange of ’Braeburn’ (Malus domestica) apple trees. Tree Physiol-ogy , 26(1):105–111, January 2006. [Guralnick et al. , 2024] Robert Guralnick, Theresa Crim-mins, Erin Grady, and Lindsay Campbell. Phenological re-sponse to climatic change depends on spring warming ve-locity. Communications Earth & Environment , 5(1):634, October 2024. [Henaff et al. , 2017] Mikael Henaff, Junbo Zhao, and Yann LeCun. Prediction Under Uncertainty with Error-Encoding Networks. arXiv:1711.04994 , November 2017. [Jia et al. , 2021] Xiaowei Jia, Jared Willard, Anuj Karpatne, Jordan S. Read, Jacob A. Zwart, Michael Steinbach, and Vipin Kumar. Physics-Guided Machine Learning for Scientific Discovery: An Application in Simulating Lake Temperature Profiles. ACM/IMS Trans. Data Sci. ,2(3):20:1–20:26, May 2021. [Karniadakis et al. , 2021] George Em Karniadakis, Ioan-nis G. Kevrekidis, Lu Lu, Paris Perdikaris, Sifan Wang, and Liu Yang. Physics-informed machine learning. Na-ture Reviews Physics , 3(6):422–440, June 2021. [Karpatne et al. , 2017] Anuj Karpatne, Gowtham Atluri, James Faghmous, Michael Steinbach, Arindam Baner-jee, Auroop Ganguly, Shashi Shekhar, Nagiza Sama-tova, and Vipin Kumar. Theory-guided Data Science: A New Paradigm for Scientific Discovery from Data. 

IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering ,29(10):2318–2331, October 2017. [Keller and Tarara, 2010] Markus Keller and Julie M. Tarara. Warm spring temperatures induce persistent season-long changes in shoot development in grapevines. Annals of Botany , 106(1):131–141, July 2010. [Keller et al. , 2016] Markus Keller, Pascual Romero, He-mant Gohil, Russell P. Smithyman, William R. Riley, L. Federico Casassa, and James F. Harbertson. Deficit Ir-rigation Alters Grapevine Growth, Physiology, and Fruit Microclimate. American Journal of Enology and Viticul-ture , 67(4):426–435, October 2016. [Knowling et al. , 2021] Matthew J. Knowling, Bree Bennett, Bertram Ostendorf, Seth Westra, Rob R. Walker, Anne Pellegrino, Everard J. Edwards, Cassandra Collins, Vinay Pagay, and Dylan Grigg. Bridging the gap between data and decisions: A review of process-based models for viti-culture. Agricultural Systems , 193:103209, October 2021. [Lorenz et al. , 1995] D.h. Lorenz, K.w. Eichhorn, H. Blei-holder, R. Klose, U. Meier, and E. Weber. Growth Stages of the Grapevine: Phenological growth stages of the grapevine (Vitis vinifera L. ssp. vinifera)—Codes and descriptions according to the extended BBCH scale. Aus-tralian Journal of Grape and Wine Research , 1(2):100– 103, 1995. [Milani and Cawley, 2024] Alejandro Milani and Alejan-dro Mac Cawley. Analyzing the impact of forecast errors in the planning of wine grape harvesting operations using a multi-stage stochastic model approach. arXiv:2405.19997 ,May 2024. [NASA, 2025] NASA. Nasapower database. https://power. larc.nasa.gov/, 2025. [Parker et al. , 2013] Amber Parker, Inaki Garcia De Cort´ azar-Atauri, Isabelle Chuine, G´ erard Barbeau, Ben-jamin Bois, Jean-Michel Boursiquot, Jean-Yves Cahurel, Marion Claverie, Thierry Dufourcq, Laurence G´ eny, Guy Guimberteau, Rainer W. Hofmann, Olivier Jacquet, Thierry Lacombe, Christine Monamy, Hernan Ojeda, Lau-rent Panigai, Jean-Christophe Payan, Bego˜ na Rodriquez Lovelle, Emmanuel Rouchaud, Christophe Schneider, Jean-Laurent Spring, Paolo Storchi, Diego Tomasi, William Trambouze, Michael Trought, and Cornelis Van Leeuwen. Classification of varieties for their timing of flowering and veraison using a modelling approach: A case study for the grapevine species Vitis vinifera L. Agricultural and Forest Meteorology , 180:249–264, October 2013. [Paszke et al. , 2017] Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Soumith Chintala, Gregory Chanan, Edward Yang, Zachary De-Vito, Zeming Lin, Alban Desmaison, Luca Antiga, and Adam Lerer. Automatic differentiation in pytorch. In 

NIPS-Workshop , 2017. [Raissi et al. , 2019] M. Raissi, P. Perdikaris, and G. E. Kar-niadakis. Physics-informed neural networks: A deep learning framework for solving forward and inverse prob-lems involving nonlinear partial differential equations. 

Journal of Computational Physics , 378:686–707, Febru-ary 2019. [Reynolds, 2022] Andrew G. Reynolds. 11 - Viticultural and vineyard management practices and their effects on grape and wine quality. In Managing Wine Quality (Second Edition) , pages 443–539. Woodhead Publishing Series in Food Science, Technology and Nutrition, January 2022. [Rogiers et al. , 2022] Suzy Y. Rogiers, Dennis H. Greer, Yin Liu, Tintu Baby, and Zeyu Xiao. Impact of climate change on grape berry ripening: An assessment of adaptation strategies for the Australian vineyard. Frontiers in Plant Science , 13:1094633, December 2022. [Ruder, 2017] Sebastian Ruder. An Overview of Multi-Task Learning in Deep Neural Networks. arXiv:1706.05098 ,June 2017. [Rudin, 2019] Cynthia Rudin. Stop explaining black box machine learning models for high stakes decisions and use interpretable models instead. Nature Machine Intelligence ,1(5):206–215, May 2019. [Salazar-Guti´ errez and Chaves-Cordoba, 2020] M.R. Salazar-Guti´ errez and B. Chaves-Cordoba. Model-ing approach for cold hardiness estimation on cherries. 

Agricultural and Forest Meteorology , 287:107946, June 2020. [Saxena et al. , 2023a] Aseem Saxena, Paola Pesantez-Cabrera, Rohan Ballapragada, Markus Keller, and Alan Fern. Multi-Task Learning for Budbreak Prediction. 

arXiv:2301.01815 , January 2023. [Saxena et al. , 2023b] Aseem Saxena, Paola Pesantez-Cabrera, Rohan Ballapragada, Kin-Ho Lam, Markus Keller, and Alan Fern. Grape Cold Hardiness Prediction via Multi-Task Learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 37, pages 15717–15723, 2023. [Seidel et al. , 2018] S. J. Seidel, T. Palosuo, P. Thorburn, and D. Wallach. Towards improved calibration of crop models – Where are we now and where should we go? European Journal of Agronomy , 94:25–35, March 2018. [Shen et al. , 2023] Chaopeng Shen, Alison Appling, Pierre Gentine, Toshiyuki Bandai, Hoshin Gupta, Alexandre Tartakovsky, Marco Baity-Jesi, Fabrizio Fenicia, Daniel Kifer, Xiaofeng Liu, Li Li, Dapeng Feng, Wei Ren, Yi Zheng, Ciaran Harman, Martyn Clark, Matthew Far-thing, and Praveen Kumar. Differentiable modeling to unify machine learning and physical models and advance Geosciences. arXiv:2301.04027 , May 2023. [Solow et al. , 2025] William Solow, Sandhya Saisubrama-nian, and Alan Fern. Wofostgym: A crop simulator for learning annual and perennial crop management strategies. In Reinforcement Learning Conference (RLC) 2025 , 2025. [Sundararajan et al. , 2017] Mukund Sundararajan, Ankur Taly, and Qiqi Yan. Axiomatic attribution for deep net-works. In Proceedings of the 34th International Confer-ence on Machine Learning (ICML 2017) , pages 3319– 3328. PMLR, 2017. [Unagar et al. , 2021] Ajaykumar Unagar, Yuan Tian, Manuel Arias Chao, and Olga Fink. Learning to Calibrate Battery Models in Real-Time with Deep Reinforcement Learning. Energies , 14(5):1361, January 2021. [Van Bree et al. , 2025] Ron Van Bree, Diego Marcos, and Ioannis N. Athanasiadis. Hybrid Phenology Modeling for Predicting Temperature Effects on Tree Dormancy. In Pro-ceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence ,volume 39, pages 28458–28466, April 2025. [van Diepen et al. , 1989] C.a. van Diepen, J. Wolf, H. van Keulen, and C. Rappoldt. WOFOST: A simulation model of crop production. Soil Use and Management , 5(1):16– 24, 1989. [Vijayshankar et al. , 2021] Sanjana Vijayshankar, Jennifer King, and Peter Seiler. Wind Power Forecasting using LSTMs. In 2021 60th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control (CDC) , pages 3658–3663, December 2021. [Wang et al. , 2023] Pengfei Wang, Ze Zhu, Wenlong Liang, Longtao Liao, and Jiashuang Wan. Hybrid mechanistic and neural network modeling of nuclear reactors. Energy ,282:128931, November 2023. [Willard et al. , 2023] Jared Willard, Xiaowei Jia, Shaoming Xu, Michael Steinbach, and Vipin Kumar. Integrating Sci-entific Knowledge with Machine Learning for Engineering and Environmental Systems. ACM Computing Surveys ,55(4):1–37, April 2023. [WSU, 2025] WSU. Agweathernet. https://weather.wsu.edu, 2025. [Zapata et al. , 2017] Diana Zapata, Melba Salazar-Gutierrez, Bernardo Chaves, Markus Keller, and Gerrit Hoogenboom. Predicting Key Phenological Stages for 17 Grapevine Cultivars (Vitis vinifera L.). American Journal of Enology and Viticulture , 68(1):60–72, January 2017. [Zhang and Yang, 2018] Yu Zhang and Qiang Yang. An overview of multi-task learning. National Science Review ,5(1):30–43, January 2018. 

# Appendix A: Model Architectures 

In this section we provide additional information on the DMC-MTL model and the variants that we used as experi-ment baselines. 

Appendix A.1: DMC Models 

The DMC-MTL model is composed of three parts, the RNN-Backbone (Figure 2a), the multi-task embedding (Figure 2b) and the interaction between the deep learning model and the biophysical model (Figure 2c), encapsulating our pro-posed DMC-MTL approach. For all DMC architectures (DMC-MTL, DMC-STL, DMC-Agg, and multi-task vari-ants), we used a Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) with 1024 hid-den units [Chung et al. , 2014]. The linear layers were reduced by factors of two: the first linear layer before the GRU was 256 hidden units, the second was 512 hidden units. After the GRU, the first linear layer was 512 hidden units and the sec-ond was 256 hidden units before making a prediction of the biophysical model parameters. Across all experiments, the embedding layer in Fθ was the same size as the number of input features (16 for the real-world datasets and 11 for the synthetic datasets). In contrast to DMC-MTL, DMC-STL and DMC-Agg did not have a multi-task embedding, and only utilized the RNN-backbone fθ and the additional linear layer following fθ .DMC-STL models were trained using data from only a sin-gle cultivar. Meanwhile, DMC-Agg models were trained on unlabeled data aggregated across all cultivars. For our exper-iments, this meant that we trained five DMC-STL models per cultivar, whereas we only trained five DMC-Agg models per domain (i.e., phenology, cold-hardiness, wheat yield). 

Appendix A.2 Error Encoding Network Architecture 

The Error Encoding Networks (EENs) used in the in-season adaptation experiments use similar model architecture as DMC-MTL models. The input to the ENNs are the error sig-nal (a scalar) and the cultivar i.d. i. In the same fasion as the DMC-MTL models, the one-hot embedding of the culti-var serves to distinguish between different error patterns that may vary between cultivars. However, given that the error signal is a scalar, the one-hot embedding is also a real-valued scalar, to avoid the cultivar embedding information dominat-ing the error signal passed to fθ . The size of the first linear layer is adjusted to account for this change in input size, oth-erwise the layer sizes remain the same as DMC-MTL. If, during a growing season, the EEN observes no error between the observation and prediction made by the DMC-MTL model, then it should not modify the future parameters predicted by the DMC-MTL network. In this case, we can assume that the DMC-MTL model is predicting the observed data optimally, and no recalibration is needed. To accomplish this, the network layers of the EEN do not contain any bias terms, and when the observed error is zero, we zero out the one-hot cultivar embedding as well. As a result, the EEN learns to quickly recalibrate the parameters predicted by the DMC-MTL model (and thus adjust the internal state of the biophysical model) for future in-season predictions. Henaff et al. (2017) observed that in many cases, the de-sired prediction (in their case next video frame prediction) can be decomposed into a deterministic and stochastic por-tion, motivating the study of EENs to handle the stochastic prediction portion conditioned on previously observed error. In the crop state prediction task, the deterministic portion is explained by the weather and cultivar i.d. while we hy-pothesize that the stochastic portion can be explained by the sparsely observed error. Instead of learning an additive la-tent state, we instead learn parameters which are added to the predicted parameters of the pretrained DMC-MTL model that are then passed to the biophysical model to make the next crop state prediction. Given that the EEN and DMC-MTL model have different inputs, it is appropriate to train the EEN model on the same training data as the DMC-MTL model, while freezing the weights of the DMC-MTL model during EEN training. As a result, the EEN learns to correct the error made by a specific 

DMC-MTL model. As shown in our results, this framing ef-fectively reduces average prediction error in low data settings. To avoid relying on future in-season observations, during we randomly select a day t for each season in the batch after which the EEN receives no further observations. 

Appendix A.3 Multi-Task Learning Variants 

In our experiments, we tested four approaches to embedding embedding task-specific cultivar information into our multi-task models. We expand on these methods below: 1. DMC-MTL is our best performing model across all datasets and uses a concatenation embedding based on a one-hot embedding of the cultivar. This embedding is the dimensionality of the weather features (16 for real-world data and 11 for synthetic data) and is concatenated on to the weather data as shown in Figure 2b before be-ing fed into the first fully connected layer and subse-quently the GRU. 2. DMC-MTL-Add uses the same learnable one-hot embed-ding as DMC-MTL. However, this embedding vector is added to the weather vector instead of concatenated be-fore being fed into the first fully connected layer. Thus, between DMC-MTL-Add and DMC-MTL, the first fully connected layer has a differing input size. 3. DMC-MTL-Mult uses the same approach as DMC-MTL-Add, but instead multiplies the weather informa-tion by the learnable embedding vector. 4. DMC-MTL-MultiH uses different fully connected lay-ers for each cultivar as prediction heads. This architec-ture shares the same structure as DMC-MTL (Figure 2b) with the exception that there are 31 fully connected lay-ers for phenology and 20 for cold-hardiness instead of a single output layer. Each final fully connected layer is trained only on the per-cultivar information, while the rest of the layers are trained in unison on all data. These four approaches encompass hard parameter shar-ing and embedding methods fundamental to multi-task learn-ing [Zhang and Yang, 2018]. Thus, along with DMC-STL and DMC-Agg variants described in the main text, they rep-resent a comprehensive study on the utilty of multi-task learn-ing in our proposed hybrid modeling framework. 

Appendix A.4 Deep Learning Models 

The deep learning models (RNN with classification and re-gression targets) used the same network architecture as DMC-MTL ( Fθ ) as suggested by Saxena et al. (2023b). However, instead of using 1024 hidden units for the GRU, we used 2048 hidden units and scaled the linear layers accordingly (see Figure 2b). The prediction target for the cold-hardiness and WOFOST wheat yield experiments (see Appendix B.4 )was a regression approximation of the crop state. For grape cold-hardiness prediction target was not just the LTE50, but also the LTE10 and LTE90 as well (the lethal temperatures at which 10% and 90% of dormant grape bud die, respectively) with the training loss as the sum of the MSE values across the LTE50, LTE10, and LTE90 observations. In practice, we found that this extra LTE10 and LTE90 data was unneeded to make accurate predictions of LTE50. For grape phenology we used a classification target of four classes corresponding to dormancy, bud break, bloom, and veraison. For the regres-sion tasks we used mean squared error (MSE) loss and for the classification task we used Cross Entropy Loss with soft-max activation to obtain the highest probability of a specific phenological stage. 

Appendix A.5 Hybrid Models Physics Informed Neural Network The PINN models used a network architecture identical to the deep learning models (Figure 2b) using a stage-based classification target for grape phenology and regression target for cold-hardiness and wheat yield. Unlike the deep learning models, the PINN models were trained using a physics-informed loss based on the biophysical model outputs to penalize biologically unre-alistic predictions [Aawar et al. , 2025]: 

LP IN N = 1 − pN

> N

X

> i=1

( ˆ yi − yi)2 + pN

> N

X

> i=1

( ˆ yi − ˙yi)2

where yi was the observed crop state, ˆyi was the crop state prediction of the PINN, and ˙yi was the crop state prediction of the biophysical model based on the best stationary model parameters. We found empirically that p = 0 .5 produced the best phenology predictions, and used that value in our cold-hardiness and wheat yield results. 

Residual Error Hybrid Model Residual error hybrid mod-els combine a primary biophysical model with an auxiliary deep learning model to learn the structure of the remaining forecast error. Instead of assuming that the base biophys-ical model captures all predictive information, this hybrid approach explicitly learns the structure of the residual error with a deep learning approach. By reducing the scope that the data-driven model needs to learn, predictive accuracy and generalization is improved as the biophysical model provides the majority of the prediction structure. We use the model architecture described in Figure 2b. The biophysical model has per-cultivar parameters calibrated with Bayesian Optimization or brute force [Solow et al. , 2025; Ferguson et al. , 2014]. The output of the biophysical model is added to the output of the deep learning model and the sum of both terms is used in the loss function for training Fθ .

TempResponse Hybrid Model The temperature response hybrid model for phenology [Van Bree et al. , 2025] replaces the temperature response function in the GDD phenology model with a small feedforward neural network. This design choice is based on the observation that many GDD model variants change the temperature response function which adds bias to the model. Instead Van Bree et al. (2025) suggest to make this temperature response function learnable, reduc-ing the bias in model choice selection. See Appendix C.1 for a description of the temperature response function. In the TempResponse hybrid model, the GDD model is im-plemented in a differentiable framework [Paszke et al. , 2017] and gradient descent is performed both on the neural network parameters and GDD model parameters to learn the best fit model parameters and temperature response function. While the TempResponse hybrid model was originally de-fined for tree phenology, we modified it to function with the Ferguson cold-hardiness model as well [Ferguson et al. ,2014]. The biophysical Ferguson cold-hardiness model mod-els two stages of dormancy with a transition occurring when sufficient chilling units are reached [Ferguson et al. , 2011]. The chilling accumulation function is approximated by a small feedforward neural network in the same way that the temperature response function in the GDD model is learned. Thus, in the TempResponse hybrid model for cold-hardiness, we perform gradient descent on both the neural network pa-rameters and Ferguson cold-hardiness model parameters to learn the best fit model. 

# Appendix B: Biophysical Model Descriptions 

Before a biophysical model is used for agricultural crop state prediction, it must be calibrated with historical data. Com-mon approaches used in the agricultural community for pa-rameter calibration include brute force search [Ferguson et al. , 2014], regression techniques [Zapata et al. , 2017], and Bayesian optimization [Seidel et al. , 2018]. However, these approaches assume that a stationary parameter set best ex-plains the observed time series data during the growing sea-son. Recent work has shown that early spring warming im-pacts phenology [Guralnick et al. , 2024], indicating that a stationary heat accumulation model is insufficient and it is well understood that other weather features impact phenol-ogy [Greer et al. , 2006; Badeck et al. , 2004]. Our approach addresses both of these concerns by conditioning phenology on exogenous weather features via daily parameter calibra-tion. Below we describe the PyTorch implementation to con-vert biophysical models into a differentiable framework, the biophysical models, and the parameters of the models that are calibrated using our DMC-MTL approach. 

Appendix B.1: PyTorch Implementation 

To create differentiable implementations, we replace all mathematical operation in each biophysical model with the corresponding PyTorch operation so that gradients are tracked. Parameters, states, and rates are instantiated as ten-sors instead of floats. To enable batch learning, all conditional statements are replaced by ‘where’ statements. 

Appendix B.2: Growing Degree Day Phenology Model 

Grape phenology is described by the Eichhorn-Lorenz phe-nological stages [Lorenz et al. , 1995] and includes three key phenological states: bud break, bloom, and veraison. Accu-rate prediction of these three states enable growers to follow crop management policies more precisely in order to increase yield and quality, and to increase vineyard efficiency by en-suring farm labor is available during the growing season. The Growing Degree Day (GDD) model is a mechanistic phenology model that makes predictions from January 1st un-til September 7th, for the three key phenological stages [Zap-ata et al. , 2017]. The GDD model accumulates the amount of Degree Days (DD) needed to transition between phenological stages. Given a base temperature value Tb, and a maximum effective temperature Tm, the degree days can be computed: 

DD =

> H

X

> i=1

min  Tm, (Ti − Tb)

where H is the length of the season and the term inside the summand is the temperature response function. A stage transition occurs when DD is greater than a specific threshold. Each stage, bud break, bloom, and veraison, has an associated threshold value. In Table 4 we list the seven parameters of the GDD model and the associated ranges that we chose to use in the DMC method for normalizing parameters after the tanh 

activation. 

Appendix B.3: Ferguson Cold-Hardiness Model Description 

Grape cold-hardiness characterizes the grapevine’s resistance to lethal cold temperatures from September 7th to May 15th [Ferguson et al. , 2011]. When cold-hardiness is low in the spring and fall, sudden frost events can cause significant damage to to dormant buds resulting in a decrease in yield quantity. Cold-hardiness is difficult to measure in the field; consequently, grape growers rely on the Ferguson model for daily predictions of LTE50, the temperature when 50% of dormant buds freeze [Ferguson et al. , 2014]. By contrasting the LTE50 predictions with the weather forecast, grape grow-ers decide whether preventative measures (e.g., wind ma-chines and heaters) are needed to protect the dormant buds. The Ferguson model computes the change in LTE50, ∆Hc,as a function of daily acclimation and deacclimation based on dormancy stage and ambient temperature. See Ferguson 

et al. (2011) for a complete description. The Ferguson model parameters that we calibrate in our approach and the corre-sponding ranges are listed in Table 4. 

Appendix B.4: WOFOST Wheat Model Description 

As an additional testing domain to complement phenology and cold-hardiness, we consider the wheat yield domain. Ac-curate forecast of staple crop yields are critical to financial planning. The WOFOST crop growth model [van Diepen et al. , 1989] is widely used to predict field level yield for many crops, including winter wheat, by predicting the daily yield (as the daily weight of the storage organs) from January 1st to September 1st each year. Predicting hectare-level wheat yield is critical for economi-cal planning [Allen, 1994]. Using historical weather data, the WOFOST model can generate synthetic wheat yield observa-tions. The WOFOST model is a significantly more compli-cated model compared to the phenology and cold-hardiness models. While creating a PyTorch implementation required upfront work, our results demonstrate that our hybrid ap-proach significantly outperforms other modeling approaches for the prediction of winter wheat yield during the growing season. 

# Appendix C: Datasets Details 

In this section we discuss the real-world data used in our ex-periments. 

Appendix C.1: Real World Data 

As mentioned in the main text, our experiments are conducted in a data-limited setting. The cold-hardiness and phenology from up to 32 genetically diverse cultivars/genotypes of field-grown grapevines has been measured since 1988 in the labo-ratory of the WSU Irrigated Agriculture Research and Exten-sion Center in Prosser, WA (46.29°N latitute; -119.74°W lon-gitude). In the vineyards of the IAREC, the WSU-Roza Re-search Farm, Prosser, WA (46.25°N latitude; -119.73°W lon-gitude), and in the cultivar collection of Ste. Michelle Wine Estates, Paterson, WA (45.96°N latitute; -119.61°W longi-tude), cane samples containing dormant buds were collected daily, weekly, or at 2-week intervals from leaf fall in autumn to bud swell in spring while phenological stage observations (onset of bud break, bloom, and veraison) were observed dur-ing from bud swell to leaf fall. Phenology was observed daily. Table 5 shows a summary of the number of years of phe-nology data and the number of cold-hardiness samples col-lected per cultivar after data processing. In addition to the cold-hardiness and phenology measurements, the real-world weather data from nearby open-field weather station was used and contains 14 weather features: date; min, max and average temperature, humidity, and dew point; solar irra-diation; rainfall; wind speed; and evapotranspiration. The Parameter Name Parameter Description Unit Min Value Max Value GDD Model TBASEM Base Temperature ( Tb) ◦C 0 15 TEFFMX Maximum Effective Temperature ( Tm) ◦C 15 45 TSUMEM Temperature Sum for Bud Break ◦C 10 100 TSUM1 Temperature Sum for Bud Break ◦C 100 1000 TSUM2 Temperature Sum for Bloom ◦C 100 1000 TSUM3 Temperature Sum for Veraison ◦C 100 1000 TSUM4 Temperature Sum for Ripening ◦C 100 1000 Ferguson Model HCINIT Initial Cold-Hardiness ◦C -15 5HCMIN Minimum Cold-Hardiness ◦C -5 0HCMAX Maximum Cold-Hardiness ◦C -40 -20 TENDO Base Temperature During Endodormancy ◦C 0 10 TECO Base Temperature During Ecodormancy ◦C 0 10 ENACCLIM Acclimation Rate During Endodormancy ◦C◦C−1 0.2 0.2 ECACCLIM Acclimation Rate During Ecodormancy ◦C◦C−1 0.2 0.2 ENDEACCLIM Deacclimation Rate During Endodormancy ◦C◦C−1 0.2 0.2 ECDEACCLIM Deacclimation Rate During Ecodormancy ◦C◦C−1 0.2 0.2 ECOBOUND Threshold for Ecodormancy Transition ◦C -800 -200 WOFOST Model DLO Optimum Daylength for Development Hours 12 18 TSUM1 Temperature Sum for Anthesis ◦C 500 1500 TSUM2 Temperature Sum for Maturity ◦C 500 1500 VERNBASE Base Vernalization Requirement Days 0 25 VERNSAT Saturated Vernalization Requirement Days 0 100 CVO Storage Organ Conversion Efficiency kg · kg −1 0.5 0.8 RMO Storage Organ Relative Maintenance Respiration — 0.05 0.2 Table 4: The parameters of the GDD Model, Ferguson Model, and WOFOST model used in the DMC-MTL approach. The ranges correspond to the minimum and maximum values that the parameter can be after tanh activation normalizing from the range [−1, 1] 

Figure 9: Daily crop state observations for five cultivars of (a) grape phenology and (b) grape cold-hardiness during a single growing season. Modeling approaches must predict these curves with biologically consistency. Despite experiencing the same weather, cultivars exhibit different behaviors, making naive data aggregation inadequate and motivating the use of a multi-task approach. 

synthetic datasets generated from the NASAPower database contain nine weather features: date, day length, min, max, and average temperature, reference and potential evapotran-spiration, rainfall, and solar irradiation. The processed datasets are available in our code repository https://tinyurl. com/IRAS-DMC-MTL, and the raw data may be shared upon request. 

Appendix C.2: Data Processing 

Historical grapevine data is inherently noisy and contains many missing weather observations. To make the data usable, we process it in the following ways: (1) If any weather fea-ture is missing more than 10% values, we discard the entire season. Otherwise, we fill missing values with linear interpo-lation between the two nearest observed values. (2) We nor-malize all weather features using z-score normalization. For the date, we use a two feature periodic date embedding using sine and cosine. (3) For phenology, we discard any seasons that do not record bud break, bloom, and veraison. We fill val-ues between observations with the last previous observation, as only the onset of a phenological stage is recorded in the dataset. We ignore other phenological stages present as they are not predicted by the GDD model. (4) For cold-hardiness, we include any season with at least one valid LTE50 observa-tion. Missing LTE50 values are masked during training. For our phenology experiments, we consider all cultivars except Syrah as there is not sufficient data to form a test set. For our cold-hardiness experiments, we omit the Aligote, Al-varinho, Auxerrois, Cabernet Franc, Durif, Green Veltliner, Melon, Muscant Blanc, Petit Verdot, Pinot Blanc, Pinot Noir, and Tempranillo cultivars from our dataset either due to insuf-ficient data for a test set, or inavailability of Ferguson model parameters to serve as a baseline. 

Appendix C.3: Characteristics of Crop Data 

Real-world crop observation data are governed by strict bi-ological constraints. For example, phenological observa-tions resemble a step function and cannot return to a previ-Cultivar Years of Pheno. Data Years of LTE Data Total LTE Samples Aligote 9 2 20 Alvarinho 9 10 120 Auxerrois 9 8 101 Barbera 8 11 130 Cabernet Franc 17 3 28 Cabernet Sauvignon 18 27 629 Chardonnay 21 20 593 Chenin Blanc 17 15 160 Concord 16 20 403 Durif 9 0 0Gewurztraminer 16 7 78 Green Veltliner 9 10 120 Grenache 15 13 144 Lemberger 17 4 43 Malbec 17 14 208 Melon 8 1 10 Merlot 21 20 797 Mourvedre 9 10 118 Muscat Blanc 16 10 119 Nebbiolo 8 13 153 Petit Verdot 8 10 117 Pinot Blanc 9 6 74 Pinot Gris 18 13 148 Pinot Noir 17 10 121 Riesling 17 27 524 Sangiovese 9 13 148 Sauvignon Blanc 9 12 141 Semillon 17 12 186 Syrah 2 17 414 Tempranillo 8 7 81 Viognier 9 12 147 Zinfandel 13 12 133 Table 5: Summary of real-world grapevine cultivar phenology and cold-hardiness observations collected from Washington State Uni-versity in Prosser, WA. 

ous stage. Wheat yield observations are a strictly concave curve: yield increases during the reproductive phase and de-creases after the crop ripens until death. Figure 9 illustrates the structured nature of seasonal observations in grape phe-nology, cold-hardiness, and wheat yield data across five culti-vars. Prediction approaches that violate these constraints and produce biologically unrealistic outputs, including those with low average error, cannot be trusted for medium-range fore-casting [Rudin, 2019]. Furthermore, seasonal observations are sparse and often vary per cultivar, requiring efficient data aggregation for learning. All three domains in Figure 9 share the following charac-teristics: data is sparse among cultivars, values have a strict biological structure, and observations are infrequent or un-changing for a large portion of the growing season. These shared characteristics make the cold-hardiness and wheat yield domains valuable benchmarks for evaluating our pro-posed hybrid modeling framework. While conventional clas-sification and regression approaches may seem appropriate, our results show they frequently produce biologically incon-sistent outputs and higher prediction errors. In contrast, our proposed dynamic parameter calibration approach achieves lower average error while maintaining biological consistency, offering a more reliable solution for real-world crop state forecasting to inform agricultural decision making. Models Hidden Size Learning Rate Batch Size Learning Rate Anneal DMC-MTL 1024 0.0001 12 0.9 DMC-STL 1024 0.005 4 0.9 RNN 2048 0.0001 12 0.9 PINN 2048 0.0001 12 0.9 TempHybrid 64 0.02 4 0.9 Gradient Descent N/A 0.1 4 0.9                                       

> Table 6: Best hyperparameters found for each model type after five-fold cross validation on the entire grape phenology dataset. Solution Approaches Synthetic Wheat Yield
> Q1a: DMC-MTL (Ours) 10.63 ±7.39
> Gradient Descent 12.69 ±10.7 ∗
> Deep-MTL 31.63 ±16.8 ∗
> PINN 36.56 ±18.8 ∗
> Residual Hybrid 14.11 ±10.9 ∗
> Q1b:
> DMC-STL 15.46 ±17.1 ∗
> DMC-Agg 42.29 ±7.58 ∗
> DMC-MTL-Mult 14.42 ±9.74 ∗
> DMC-MTL-Add 13.66 ±9.96 ∗
> DMC-MTL-MultiH 14.72 ±8.92 ∗
> Table 7: The average seasonal error (RMSE in kg/ha for wheat yield) over all ten cultivars and five seeds in the testing set. DMC-MTL is compared against gradient descent on the biophysical model, a deep learning approach, two hybrid models, and five DMC variants. Best-in-class results are reported in bold. A ∗indicates that DMC-MTL yields a statistically significant improvement (p < 0.05 )using the paired t-test relative to the corresponding baseline.

# Appendix D: Experimental Details and Hyperparameter Selection 

We outline additional portions of our experimental protocol not included in the main text for reproducibility. All exper-iments were run on a Ubuntu 24.04 system with a NVIDIA 3080Ti with 10GB of VRAM. As noted in the main text and in Appendix C.1 , the amount of per-cultivar data is limited, there is high variance in weather and phenological response each season, and some cultivars only have four seasons of data. To address these challenges in validation and evalua-tion, we build our training and validation sets as follows. For five different seeds, we first withhold two seasons of data per cultivar for the testing set. Then, we withhold an ad-ditional season of data from the training per cultivar for the validation set. For the most data scarce cultivars, this results in one season of data for the training set and one season for the validation set. However, many cultivars have more train-ing data that is leveraged given the multi-task setting. We consider five different hyperparameters for our 5-fold validation. (1) Number of GRU hidden units in [128 , 256 , 512 , 1024 , 2048] , (2) Learning rate in 

[0 .01 , 0.005 , 0.001 , 0.0005 , 0.0001] , (3) Batch size in [4 , 12 , 16 , 24 , 32] , (4) Learning rate annealing in 

[0 .8, 0.85 , 0.9, 0.95 , 1] , and (5) Coefficient p for PINN loss in [0 .1, 0.25 , 0.5, 0.75 , . 9] . We also considered the omission of the extra linear layers before the GRU. We performed a grid search over these parameters for all model types. The average performance on the validation set for each set of hyperparameters was recorded over the five training/validation/testing splits. After these hyperparame-ters (see Table 6) were selected, we retrained each model five times using the combined training and validation data from each split with the best set of hyperparameters found. 

# Appendix E: Additional Results 

We consider additional research questions to supplement the five research questions in the main text. Our questions are motivated by further understanding the impact of multi-task learning, the importance of expressivity and history in our hybrid modeling approach, and leveraging these observations to inform viticultural research. These questions are: 

Q1 : In the wheat yield setting, how does DMC-MTL com-pare to (a) baselines and (b) alternative multi-task em-beddings? 

Q2 : Do per-cultivar predictions improve under the multi-task learning framework? 

Q3 : How well does DMC-MTL optimize per-stage phenol-ogy predictions? 

Q4 : Does the amount that the daily parameter predictions are allowed to vary impact DMC-MTL? 

Q5 : What is the importance of previous weather in daily pa-rameter predictions? 

Q6 : How can daily parameter predictions inform viticultural research? 

Q1: WOFOST Wheat Yield Supporting our results in grape phenology and cold-hardiness, DMC-MTL achieved best in class results on the WOFOST wheat yield dataset. It out performed gradient descent on the seven model param-eters (see Table 4), the multi-task deep learning model, and other hybrid modeling approaches. This result demonstrates DMC-MTL’s robustness to different prediction tasks, given the complexity of the WOFOST model and even outperforms other the gradient descent baseline, despite the fact that the synthetic data was generated using static parameters. Additionally, the WOFOST multi-task results (Q1b in Ta-ble 7) mirror those reported in the main text for phenology and cold-hardiness. In the WOFOST results, the tasks vary more widely, as evidenced by the poor performance of DMC-Agg. Nonetheless, DMC-MTL is still an improvement over DMC-STL, indicating our approach’s ability to share limited data efficiently across tasks. DMC-MTL also outperformed the other methods of providing task-specific information. 

Q2: Per-Cultivar Predictions Table 8 shows the per-cultivar comparison between DMC-MTL and DMC-STL. For phenology, 84% of cultivars on average saw a reduction of er-ror using DMC-MTL compared to DMC-STL with an aver-age decrease in error by 2.41 days while for the 16% of culti-vars that saw an increase in error, that increase was marginal at only 0.51 days. Meanwhile for cold-hardiness, all culti-vars saw a decrease in error. Most interestingly, even culti-vars with larger datasets still see an increase in performance compared to the DMC-STL models per-cultivar. This result Phenology Cold-Hardiness % Improve 84% 100% Avg. Increase 2.41 ± 1.88 0.37 ± 0.15 Avg. Decrease 0.51 ± 0.28 0.00 ± 0.00    

> Table 8: Comparison of DMC-MTL vs DMC-STL on a per-cultivar basis with the percentage of cultivars that saw a reduction in error from DMC-STL to DMC-MTL along with the average reduction in error (RMSE in days for phenology, ◦Cfor cold-hardiness) and the average increase in error for cultivars where accuracy worsened.
> Figure 10: The distribution of per-stage prediction error (RMSE in days) of the DMC-MTL model and GDD model. Additionally, DMC-MTL-SS models were trained to minimize per-stage error (as opposed to cumulative stage error).

indicates that even these larger cultivar datasets are insuffi-cient to fully capture the underlying patterns within the data and thus benefit from data aggregation with additional culti-var datasets. Overall, the results demonstrate that DMC-MTL leverages data efficiently across cultivars and generally im-proves per-cultivar predictions, enabling accurate prediction with limited data. 

Q3: Optimization of Per-Stage Phenology Predictions 

DMC-MTL demonstrated a reduction in cumulative error across the three key phenological stages (Table 2 in main text); however, for grape growers to effectively use the model, it is important to understand how well DMC-MTL minimized error at each individual stage. As a baseline (DMC-MTL-SS), we trained DMC-MTL models on the same-real world grape phenology dataset, but changed the objective to mini-mize only the prediction error of a single stage: bud break, bloom, or veraison. In Figure 10, we show the average error across cultivars attributed to each stage. Our results show that DMC-MTL effectively minimized er-ror in predicting bud break, bloom and veraison stages, per-forming similar to the single-stage prediction baseline DMC-MTL-SS. Both the DMC-MTL and GDD models exhibited similar trends in the difficulty of prediction; bud break and bloom had similar errors, while veraison proved to be harder to predict. However, these results were near identical to the DMC-MTL-SS baseline, indicating that the DMC-MTL model was able to optimize over all stages effectively with-Figure 11: The performance of DMC-MTL with decreased parame-ter smoothing. Results are averaged over five seeds 

out compromise. The variance can be attributed to different cultivars; we found that the data from some cultivars is inher-ently harder to predict accurately. 

Q4: Effect of Paramter Smoothing A key assumption of DMC-MTL is that the model parameters can vary in the ranges given by Table 4. This assumption ensures that predic-tions remain biologically realistic by staying within known parameter ranges, but also allows for increased expressivity when compared to the stationary parameter biophysical mod-els. However, the stationary parameter biophysical models and DMC-MTL hybrid model exist on opposite sides of a spectrum of parameter smoothness. DMC-MTL allows for large changes in daily parameter predictions while the sta-tionary biophysical model disallows any parameter change. To investigate the importance of the increased model ex-pressiveness that DMC-MTL allows, we consider DMC-MTL variants that limit the daily change in parameters. To do so, we let the DMC-MTL GRU predict a daily delta pa-rameter term and add this delta to the previous day’s param-eters before using the biophysical model to predict the crop state. To force predictions to remain biologically realistic, we clamp the ranges given in Table 4. We let the model parame-ters vary by a factor of 0.01, 0.001, 0.0001, and 0.00001 of the original parameter ranges. We choose 0.01 as the largest fac-tor as it roughly represents the largest observed daily change in the base DMC-MTL models. Our results in Figure 11 demonstrate that increased expres-sivity (model parameter delta scale increasing from 0.00001 to 0.01 ) increase the performance of the DMC-MTL model. At a parameter smoothness of 0.00001, model performance roughly matches the GDD and Ferguson biophysical models. However, by a parameter smoothing factor of 0.01, perfor-mance approaches that of the base DMC-MTL models. Thus, we conclude that varying model parameters daily and in large ranges is critical for the accuracy of our modeling approach. 

Q5: Impact of Increasing Weather Windows on Parame-ter Selection The DMC-MTL approach leverages a RNN to encode the weather information for the growing season up to day T to predict biophysical model parameters for day 

T . However, the biophysical also maintain an internal crop state that evolves with each input. Thus, unlike a deep learn-ing model which will require the entire weather sequence to make adequate phenology predictions, our hybrid DMC-

> Figure 12: The performance of DMC-MTL with a sliding weather window. Results are averaged over five seeds.

MTL model may not. To demonstrate the importance of the recurrent modeling choice in encoding this previous weather information in the DMC-MTL framework, we consider ad-ditional variants to the approach where the GRU uses a slid-ing window k and only uses the weather featuers from the previous T − k days to make parameter predictions for day 

T . We also compare against a non-recurrent network archi-tecture that replaces the with three feed forward layers, each with 64 hidden units, with ReLU activation. Our results in Figure 12 show that for phenology, there is a general trend where a larger weather window increases the prediction accuracy. This trend is not as clear in cold-hardiness. However in cold-hardiness prediction, many other models only use the previous three or five days [Salazar-Guti´ errez and Chaves-Cordoba, 2020], indicating that previ-ous weather is not as critical. Nonetheless, the best model performance still utilized all weather information. Overall, we can conclude that even though the DMC-MTL hybrid approach uses a biophysical model that maintains an inter-nal state, there is still value in incorporating previously seen weather information into daily predictions. Between the results in Figures 11 and 12 it is clear that varying model parameters and a larger weather window in-creases the prediction accuracy of DMC-MTL compared to its variants as well as the biophysical GDD and Ferguson grape phenology and cold-hardiness models. These obser-vations are in line with viticultural research that early sea-son weather and non-stationary parameterization are key to proper phenology modeling [Greer et al. , 2006; Guralnick et al. , 2024]. Without the use of deep learning techniques and a hybrid approach, it is not immediately clear how to accom-plish these two desiderata for viticulturalists. Thus, DMC-MTL offers a compelling approach to accurate phenology modeling. 

Q6: Interpretability of DMC-MTL Interpretable models are desirable for agronomists as they increase trust and further scientific understanding of underlying crop processes [Rudin, 2019]. Unlike purely data-driven deep learning models, our hybrid modeling approach enables sensitivity and attribution analysis through methods such as integrated gradients [Sun-dararajan et al. , 2017]. Observing the results of the integrated gradients analysis enables viticulturalists to understand how exogenous weather features impact the prediction of different Figure 13: The integrated gradients values of the Base Tempera-ture Sum parameter prediction for the 2024 growing season of the Chardonnay cultivar. Red values indicate positive attribution and blue values indicate negative attribution. 

parameters withing the biophysical model. As these model parameters and the biophyisical model are well understood, hypotheses can be generated on the impacts of these exoge-nous weather features on phenology which can then be veri-fied through laboratory and field trials. In Figure 13, we show the integrated gradients analysis of the 17 input features in the DMC-MTL model and their im-pact on the prediction of the Base Temperature Sum parame-ter for day 50 in the 2024 growing season for the Chardonnay cultivar for phenology prediction. First, observe that the ma-jority of the attribution is clustered within the six days prior to the prediction. This is intuitive as more recent weather data should be more relevant. However, we also see attribution as far back as day seven for the dew point and wind features. This further validates our findings in Figure 12 that historical data is broadly important to accurate phenology predictions. Interestingly, rainfall and relative humidity have the largest negative and positive impacts on the prediction value of the Base Temperature Sum parameter relative to the baseline. In this experiment, the baseline is the daily average of each weather feature across all observed weather. However, other baselines such as the all zeroes baseline are possible choices, with the latter being more popular in attribution in image clas-sification networks [Sundararajan et al. , 2017]. Taking these observations into account, a viticulturalist can then use the integrated gradients results of a trained DMC-MTL model to hypothesize and validate effects of exogenous weather fea-tures on phenology. This analysis is only made possible by the hybrid model-ing approach. A data-driven approach does not give sufficient insight into the underlying crop process, while the available biophysical models do not account for the impacts of exoge-nous weather features. DMC-MTL is a best-of-both worlds in this space, offering increased prediction accuracy over the biophyisical model and increased interpretability compared to data-driven approaches. 

Summary of Results In this section, we have expanded on our grape phenology and cold-hardiness results with the addition of the WOFOST wheat yield domain. Our results demonstrate that DMC-MTL outperforms other modeling al-ternatives, even with the more complex WOFOST model. Secondly, we showed that DMC-MTL effectively optimizes per-stage phenology predictions which are key to vineyard management operations. Finally, our results on parameter smoothing and weather windows showed that our assump-tions for our DMC-MTL hybrid model were both appropriate and necessary to find the best fit model with the available data.