Title: Multi-modal, multi-scale representation learning for satellite imagery analysis just needs a good ALiBi

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.10347v1

Published Time: Tue, 14 Apr 2026 01:02:04 GMT

Number of Pages: 4

Markdown Content:
## MULTI-MODAL, MULTI-SCALE REPRESENTATION LEARNING FOR SATELLITE IMAGERY ANALYSIS JUST NEEDS A GOOD ALIBI 

Patrick Kage 1* and Pavlos Andreadis 1; 1Artificial Intelligence and its Applications Institute, (University of Edinburgh, 10 Crichton Street, Newington, Edinburgh EH8 9AB) *[p.kage@ed.ac.uk] 

Abstract. Vision foundation models have been shown to be effective at processing satellite imagery into rep-resentations fit for downstream tasks, however, creating models which operate over multiple spatial resolutions and modes is challenging. This paper presents Scale-ALiBi, a linear bias transformer attention mechanism with a spa-tial encoding bias to relationships between image patches at different ground sample distance scales. We provide an implementation of Scale-ALiBi over a dataset of aligned high- and low-resolution optical and low-resolution SAR satellite imagery data using a triple-contrastive and recon-structive architecture, show an improvement on the GEO-Bench benchmark, and release the newly curated dataset publicly. 

Introduction. The volume of satellite imagery gen-erated by both governmental and commercial constel-lations has been increasing year-over-year, far eclipsing the ability for human analysts to keep up. Satellite im-agery presents an ideal use-case for representation learn-ing: while there is very little labeled data, the images captured are pre-orthorectified and tagged with location information, the sensors used to generate the images are well-characterized, and individual scenes are frequently revisited. This means that for any given location on Earth, there are multiple image captures both across sensor modalities and throughout time which are easily machine-alignable. Representation learning allows for the automatic extraction of meaningful features from multi-modal satellite imagery and thus makes downstream tasks such as land use classification and change monitoring simpler to implement. Currently, representation learn-ing models focus on learning stable representations across ground sample distances (GSDs), or across image modali-ties (e.g. radar to equivalent-resolution optical), or across temporal captures. However, few models attempt to cap-ture more than one of these representations at a time. This paper’s key contributions include first the ex-tension of the 2D-ALiBi/X-ALiBi attention mechanism 1

with GSD scaling to allow representation learning trans-formers to incorporate both scale and distance informa-tion from satellite images into the training process, and second the evaluation of the resulting attention mecha-nism over multi-scale multi-modal imagery using a novel triple-contrastive architecture. This allows for the cre-ation of a representation model which operates natively over both multi-modal and multi-resolution imagery. In order to train this model, a new dataset of aligned im-age pairs is curated by the authors, sourcing data from ESA’s Sentinel-1 SAR (Synthetic-Aperture Radar) and Sentinel-2 MSI (MultiSpectral Instrument) imaging mis-sions 2 and the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s National Agriculture Imagery Program (NAIP) high resolution im-age acquisitions. 3 This dataset is released with the paper to facilitate further research. 

Background. Foundation models in the satellite im-agery representation learning space are largely im-plemented as self-supervised vision transformers. 1, 4, 5 

Transformers, while originally designed for natural lan-guage processing tasks, have been shown to be effective at processing images once the input images are split into a sequence of patches which are then processed similarly to language tokens. 6 When trained in a self-supervised manner, these vision transformers learn representations without requiring labeled information (which is expensive to acquire at scale). Scale-MAE 5 has demonstrated the effectiveness of scal-ing the sinusoidal position encoding of image tokens by the GSD of the input sample, explicitly learning the rela-tionship between low- and high-resolution views of a sin-gle modality sample. Similarly, CROMA 1 demonstrated that contrastive learning can learn a cross-modal rep-resentation between Sentinel-1 synthetic-aperture radar (SAR) and Sentinel-2 MSI (optical) patches of uniform size. CROMA also introduced an extension of the AL-iBi linear bias attention mechanism 7 into two dimensions for both self-attention (2D-ALiBi) and cross-attention (X-ALiBi), encoding the Euclidean distance between sample pairs. Linear bias attention allows for the transformer to extrapolate to sequences longer than sequences presented during training, 7 which is a desirable property in remote sensing, as images can be extremely large. 

Method. 

Scale-ALiBi attention. In order to add a GSD scale-aware component to our representation model, we intro-duce the Scale-ALiBi attention mechanism. We define the Scale-ALiBi matrix very similarly to the 2D-ALiBi matrix, with an attention matrix A ∈ Rh×L×L for h

heads with sequence length L and head depth d. Each position in the attention matrix is given by Eq. (1): 

ahij = √d · qhi · khj 

| {z }

> normal attention

− g(i, j ) · m(h)

| {z }

> Scale-ALiBi

(1) where qhi and khj are the i-th query and j-th key (vectors of dimension d), m(h) is the head-specific fixed slope (as in ALiBi), and g(i, j ) is given by Eq. (2): 

g(i, j ) = distance(i,j) · GSD (2) where distance (i, j ) is the Euclidean distance between the patches corresponding to i and j and is multiplied with a bias of the GSD of the source image (which differentiates 

> Space Imaging Workshop. Atlanta, GA. 7-9 October 2024

1 

> arXiv:2604.10347v1 [cs.CV] 11 Apr 2026 Learned
> representations Predicted
> reconstructions
> Learned
> representations
> + GSD info
> Learned
> representations
> + GSD info
> Learned representations
> + GSD info (high res)

High-res 

optical 

Low-res 

optical 

Low-res 

SAR 

Encoder 

Encoder 

Masked Autoencoder 

Encoder 

Cross Encoder 

> Scale-ALiBi
> Scale-ALiBi, MAE
> Scale-ALiBi
> Scale-ALiBi (low res only)

Cross Encoder 

> Scale-ALiBi (low/high res)
> Scale-ALiBi

Contrastive loss Reconstruction loss Figure 1. A block diagram of the full Scale-ALiBi model. 

this approach from vanilla 2D-ALiBi/X-ALiBi). As with ALiBi and 2D-ALiBi/X-ALiBi, the bias is added during the attention calculation before the softmax step and no attention is added at the bottom of the network. This approach allows for the comparison of images at different resolutions, where a higher GSD (and higher res-olution) image may be split into more tokens than a lower GSD image. For example, a 256 × 256 Sentinel-2 image sample can be split into 1024 patches of size 8 whereas a 512 × 512 NAIP image can be split into 4092 patches of equivalent size. These samples represent the same physi-cal area, so a cross-encoder attention can be encoded as in Figure 2. 

Contrastive learning. To evaluate the effectiveness of the Scale-ALiBi attention, a setup broadly similar to CROMA 1 is used, with the addition a high-resolution en-coder Ehires and a second cross-encoder to incorporate the high-resolution token stream into the final images. See Figure 1 for an overview of the model architecture. For the contrastive learning step, three separate opti-cal and SAR ViT encoders are trained: two low-resolution encoders for the Sentinel-1 synthetic-aperture radar and Sentinel-2 optical observations ( Eradar , E lores ) and one high-resolution (2x resolution) encoder for the aligned NAIP imagery ( Ehires ). Note that the Ehires encoder produces quadruple the number of tokens as the image is at double resolution. These encoded representations are aligned using an extension of the standard InfoNCE contrastive loss objective function 8 to add an extra rep-resentation, as in Eq. (3): 

LCon = −1

| M

> 2

|2N

(M 

> 2

)X

> (m1,m 2)
> N

X

> i

exp( zi ⊤ 

> m1

zim2 /σ )

PNj exp( zj ⊤ 

> m1

zjm2 /σ )

!

(3) where M is the set of modalities (in our case low-res. op-tical, high-res. optical, and SAR),  M

> 2

 is the set of 2-combinations of M , N is the batch size, σ is the tem-perature, and zm is the linearized and normalized repre-sentation of modality m. When LCon is minimized, the 

Figure 2. An example Scale-ALiBi attention ma-trix for 4 patches of size 4 computed from a 4 × 4

source image s, with a 8×8 context image c contain-ing 16 patches. s and c represent the same physical area on the ground, and thus this matrix functions as a distance lookup table comparing these two to-ken streams. Note that here the slopes for the dif-ferent attention heads were omitted for clarity. 

representations of all three modalities from a single phys-ical location are “squeezed” together, and “pushed” away from all other representations of other scenes. Additionally, the encoded output tokens from the three encoders are cross-encoded, first with Elores and Eradar 

tokens to create a joint radar-optical encoding, and then this encoding with a second cross-encoder with the Ehires 

token stream in order to form the final token stream. Finally, these tokens are encoded using a masked au-toencoder 9 mechanism using a similar setup to CROMA, where the MAE reconstructs all sensor modalities into a 

> Space Imaging Workshop. Atlanta, GA. 7-9 October 2024

2single patch with N channels, where N is the sum of all input channels—effectively fusing the input sensors. 1 The reconstruction loss LRecon is modified to add a term for the hires token strema, as in Eq. (4): 

LRecon = 1

N

> N

X

> i

R(tradar )

M + R(tlores )

M + R(thires )

M

!

(4) where N is the batch size, M is the number of masked patches, and R(t) is sum of the differences between the ground truth Imode and the mode channels of the predicted packed representations fdec (tmode ). As in CROMA, the encoded tokens are normalized to a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1. The full function R(t)is given by Eq. (5): 

R(tmode ) = 

> M

X

> j

Imode − Norm( fDEC (tmode )) (5) Again, like CROMA, fDEC ( · ) is a ViT with a 2D sinu-soidal embedding operating over the masked multimodal patch embeddings. The final loss to be optimized is a simple addition of the contrastive loss and the reconstructive loss, as shown by Eq. (6): 

L = LCon + LRecon (6) 

Dataset curation. In order to train this model, a dataset of paired low-resolution optical, low-resolution SAR, and high-resolution optical images is required. No existing public dataset was found that fit the bill, so in addition to the analysis of the Scale-ALiBi attention, a goal of this research is to curate this dataset. As shown in Figure 3, in order to generate this dataset Sentinel-1 and Sentinel-2 images are ingested and seg-mented into XYZ tiles at a specified level Y and stored as PNGs with a 256 × 256 pixel resolution. The true-color image (TCI) product is segmented from Sentinel-2’s L2A collection directly, while the Sentinel-1 L2A VV and VH captures are scaled to 256 1000 , with the VV band assigned to the green channel and VH to the blue channel. An empty red channel is inserted, and the image is quantized to 8 bits. Then, high resolution images from NAIP are sourced for the same XYZ tiles at Y in order to form a 256 × 256 high-resolution sample. Additionally, the next tile level down ( Y + 1) is collected from NAIP in order to form a 512 double-resolution image. Due to the geographic constraints of the NAIP tileset, the Scale-ALiBi dataset is limited to images covering the continental United States and Puerto Rico. Within this area, a series of smaller regions are selected for coverage based on geographic diversity and zoom scale, and these subsets are released as different dataset sizes. See Ta-ble 1 for more information about available datasets. In-

Figure 3. A selection of samples from the Scale-ALiBi dataset. Note that the rightmost column is double the size of the normal samples. 

structions for accessing these is available from the project website 1.

Table 1. Available dataset sizes. 

Name Description Base Y Samples 

small Test/debug set 15 21,497 

full Full size dataset 15 146,502 

micro Zoomed-in dataset 17 188,060 

Results. This model is evaluated over the GEO-Bench 10 benchmark dataset, which contains 6 classifica-tion and 6 segmentation tasks over both high- and low-resolution optical and SAR imagery and includes subsets 

> 1https://github.com/pkage/scale-alibi
> Space Imaging Workshop. Atlanta, GA. 7-9 October 2024

3of the datasets for those tasks. In order to maintain a fair comparison with CROMA while keeping computa-tional constraints in mind, the CROMA model is trained with identical data on identical hardware for an equivalent amount of time; and while the preliminary Scale-ALiBi re-sults fall somewhat short of CROMA’s published state-of-the-art results the authors are optimistic that with a much larger training run, equivalent results can be achieved. Both of these models were trained with the Y = 15 full size dataset (see Table 1). For the classification tasks, a neural network with one hidden layer (of size 2048) is used on top of the learned cross-modal representations, as is standard for represen-tation learning tasks. Additionally, non-parametric meth-ods are evaluated over the raw represetations, namely k-means clustering and k-nearest neighbors ( n = 20). Ad-ditionally, a UMAP 11 dimensionality reduction prepro-cessing step for the k-means clustering was evaluated. Both the high resolution and low resolution optical en-coders were used for the Scale-ALiBi benchmarks, with the benchmark patches being scaled to 256 × 256 for the low-resolution encoder and 512 × 512 for the high-resolution encoder. The CROMA benchmark was run identically, except with the omission of the high-resolution encoder. Overall, Scale-ALiBi performed similarly or bet-ter than CROMA in these benchmarks, with full results found in Table 2. 

Table 2. GEO-Bench Benchmarks. 

Name SA-high SA-low CROMA Neural 

m-pv4ger 83 .27% 87 .77% 88 .53 %

m-forestnet 23 .51% 27 .83% 28 .27 %

m-euronet 23 .92% 31 .48% 49 .04 %

m-brick-kiln 70 .27% 70 .07% 75 .13 %

k-Means 

m-pv4ger 50 .00% 52 .83 % 50 .07% 

m-forestnet 8.98% 8.28% 10 .84 %

m-euronet 11 .91% 12 .12 % 8.34% 

m-brick-kiln 50 .86% 51 .83 % 49 .62% 

k-Means + UMAP 

m-pv4ger 49 .57% 48 .36% 51 .65 %

m-forestnet 9.18 % 8.88% 8.18% 

m-euronet 9.32% 11 .32 % 9.36% 

m-brick-kiln 52 .07 % 45 .40% 51 .66% 

k-NN 

m-pv4ger 92 .39 % 91 .89% 92 .29% 

m-forestnet 38 .26 % 37 .26% 35 .44% 

m-euronet 58 .70% 64 .40% 66 .30 %

m-brick-kiln 75 .37% 74 .97% 76 .47 %

Conclusion. In this paper, we present developmen-tal and preliminary results from the Scale-ALiBi linear bias attention mechanism for multi-modal and multi-scale remote sensing foundation models. We provided a reference implementation of the attention as an ex-tension of CROMA where a high-resolution encoder is added. This initial model is then benchmarked against an equivalently-trained CROMA instance, showing a mod-est improvement. Additionally, a dataset of aligned low-resolution SAR, low-resolution optical, and high-resolution optical image sample also of value for remote sensing work and is released alongside the paper. Future work for this project includes the curation and release of a much larger dataset, as well as longer training runs for the Scale-ALiBi model. 

References. 

[1] A. Fuller, K. Millard, and J. R. Green, “CROMA: Remote sensing representations with contrastive radar-optical masked autoencoders,” in Advances in Neural In-formation Processing Systems 36: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2023, NeurIPS 2023, New Orleans, LA, USA, December 10 - 16, 2023 

(A. Oh, T. Naumann, A. Globerson, K. Saenko, M. Hardt, and S. Levine, eds.), 2023. [2] E. S. Agency, “Copernicus Sentinel data, processed by ESA,” 2024. [3] U. G. Survey, “National Agriculture Imagery Program (NAIP),” 2024. [4] Y. Cong, S. Khanna, C. Meng, P. Liu, E. Rozi, Y. He, M. Burke, D. B. Lobell, and S. Ermon, “SatMAE: Pre-training Transformers for Temporal and Multi-Spectral Satellite Imagery,” Jan. 2023. [5] C. J. Reed, R. Gupta, S. Li, S. Brockman, C. Funk, B. Clipp, K. Keutzer, S. Candido, M. Uyttendaele, and T. Darrell, “Scale-MAE: A Scale-Aware Masked Autoen-coder for Multiscale Geospatial Representation Learn-ing,” Sept. 2023. [6] A. Dosovitskiy, L. Beyer, A. Kolesnikov, D. Weis-senborn, X. Zhai, T. Unterthiner, M. Dehghani, M. Minderer, G. Heigold, S. Gelly, J. Uszkor-eit, and N. Houlsby, “An Image is Worth 16x16 Words: Transformers for Image Recognition at Scale.” https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.11929v2, Oct. 2020. [7] O. Press, N. A. Smith, and M. Lewis, “Train Short, Test Long: Attention with Linear Biases Enables Input Length Extrapolation,” Apr. 2022. [8] A. van den Oord, Y. Li, and O. Vinyals, “Representation Learning with Contrastive Predictive Coding,” Jan. 2019. [9] K. He, X. Chen, S. Xie, Y. Li, P. Doll´ ar, and R. Gir-shick, “Masked Autoencoders Are Scalable Vision Learn-ers.” https://arxiv.org/abs/2111.06377v3, Nov. 2021. [10] A. Lacoste, N. Lehmann, P. Rodriguez, E. D. Sherwin, H. Kerner, B. L¨ utjens, J. A. Irvin, D. Dao, H. Alemoham-mad, A. Drouin, M. Gunturkun, G. Huang, D. Vazquez, D. Newman, Y. Bengio, S. Ermon, and X. X. Zhu, “GEO-Bench: Toward Foundation Models for Earth Monitor-ing,” Dec. 2023. [11] L. McInnes, J. Healy, and J. Melville, “UMAP: Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection for Dimension Reduction,” Sept. 2020. 

> Space Imaging Workshop. Atlanta, GA. 7-9 October 2024

4