Title: 2604.01801v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.01801v1

Published Time: Fri, 03 Apr 2026 00:40:53 GMT

Number of Pages: 18

Markdown Content:
Compressive hyperspectral phasor imaging with single -pixel detection for spectral 

task s

Jiaqi Song 1,4 , Baolei Liu 2,3,* , Muchen Zhu 1, Yao Wang 1, Yue Yu 2, Zhaohua Yang 2,3 ,

Xiaolan Zhong 1, Fan Wang 1,*  

> 1

School of Physics, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China  

> 2

School of Instrumentation Science and Optoelectronic Engineering, Beihang 

University, Beijing 100191, China  

> 3

Hangzhou International Innovation Institute, Beihang University, Hangzhou, 

311115, China  

> 4

Institute of Physics, China Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China 

These authors contributed equally to this work: Jiaqi Song and Baolei Liu 

* Correspondence:  liubaolei@buaa.edu.cn , fanwang@buaa.edu.cn 

Abstract 

Spectral vision task plays a pivotal role in extracting discriminative spectral -spatial 

features from high -dimensional data, enabling fine -grained identification beyond 

human vision . However, traditional methods usually involve first collecting rich 

spectral -spatial information and then using complex algorithms to digitally process it 

into scene classification and recognition, which poses challenges for in data acquisition 

and processi ng. Here, we demonstrate a compressive Hyperspectral Phasor Imaging 

with Single -pixel detection (HyPIS) that leverages highly compressed spati al -spectral 

data to achieve spectral task. Two optical encoders are used for wavelength -dependent 

sine - and cosine -encod ing that transforms spectral signals into a two -dimensional (2D) 

phasor plot. By applying spatial -temporal illumination patterns, a single -pixel detector 

is enough to reconstruct the phasor image of the object . This allow s to directly generate 

pixel -wise spectral task , bypassing 3D hyperspectral data. Our experiments show that 

HyPIS can perform real -time classification and recognition tasks of different scene s,

reducing the required amount of data by two orders of magnitude, and it can still 

accurately classify under low light and uneven lighting conditions. This work develops 

a completely new spectral technology that enables spectral tasks to be performed 

without obtaining high -resolution hyperspectral datasets , holding promise for spectral 

applications in mobile devices, robotics, and satellite technologies. 

Keywords: hyperspectral image classification, single -pixel detector, phasor 

analysis. 

Introduction 

Spectral vision combines traditional imaging and spectral detection, enabling the 

acquisition of object information in both spatial and spectral dimensions [1 -5] . This 

capability enables the capture of subtle spectral discrepancies. Therefore, it has been 

widely applied in many fields, such as scientific research, non -destructive food testing, 

biomedical applications, industrial inspection, and consumer electronic s[6 -10] . After the 

acquisition of high -dimensional spati al -spectral data , versatile machine vision tasks, such as sce ne classification , identification, and quantitative inversion, are applied for 

practical applications [6, 11 -15] . However, the acquisition of spatial images with hundreds 

of continuous spectral information leads to explosive data volumes, challenging both 

data transmission, storage, and processing. 

To mitigate the high dimensionality of hyperspectral data, typical approaches such 

as linear unmixing, principal component analysis, and nonlinear manifold learning 

methods have been proposed for dimensionality reduction [14, 16 -18] , aiming to remove 

redundant spectral information and improve computational efficiency. More recently, a 

transformative shift toward "spectral machine vision" has emerged , aiming to bypass 

the heavy data bottleneck entirely by integrating analysis directly into the hardware. A

landmark example is the development of Spectral Kernel Machines (SKMs) [19] , which 

use electrically tunable photodetectors to perform classification and recognition of 

object at the data acquisition points , demonstrating absolute advantages in speed and 

energy efficiency. However, this reliance on prior knowledge means that the system's 

performance is essentially related to the scope of its training library, which may pose 

limitations when encountering completely unknown or rapidly changing spectral 

environments. 

In search of a more universal and training -free alternative, spectral phasor analysis 

offers an elegant physical -geometry approach [20 -22] . By transforming a continuous 

spectrum into a single point in a 2D phasor plane through Fourier transform, this 

method allows for rapid spectral unmixing even with low signal -to -noise inputs without 

us ing the entire spectrum [23] . To date, this approach has been demonstrated across 

multiple imaging modalities, such as fast multi -color microscopy, bioluminescence 

fluorescence microscopy, and snapshot hyperspectral microscopy [24 -28] . However, like 

SKM s, current methods can only reduce the measurement number along the spectral 

dimension , leaving the spatial data bottleneck unaddressed . Although point scanning 

can be used to probe different spatial location s[24] , this method is inefficient and not 

conducive to real -time operation. 

To bring this gap, we introduce Single -pixel imaging (SPI), an emerging 

computational imaging technique , to provide a crucial element of spatial compression. 

It can reconstruct object images under compressed sampling conditions [29 -34] , offering 

an effective solution for imaging in unusual wavebands where array detectors are 

difficult to manufacture or cost -prohibitive [35 -37] . To date, it has been widely applied in 

a wide waveband that ranges from X-rays to terahertz [38 -44] . While hyperspectral SPI 

has been explored, it usually requires complicated spectral modulation and significant 

acquisition time, with reconstruction processes that remain computationally heavy for 

video -rate imaging [10, 45, 46] .

In this work , we propose a compressive Hyperspectral Phasor Imaging with Single -

pixel detection (HyPIS) for spectral vision task which synergizes optical phasor 

encoding with compressive SPI . Unlike previous spectral task systems, our approach 

achieves a 2D compression: spectral information is compressed into the coordinates of 

the 2D phasor plane through optical sine/cosine encod ing , while spatial information is 

compressed modulat ed by spatial -temporal illumination patterns . The phasor images 

can be reconstructed by compressive Phasor -SPI algorithm (see “Principles of HyPIS ”)and perform spectral tasks. With the data compression in both spatial and spectral 

dimensions, a reduction of the data volume by two orders of magnitude can be achieved, 

which decreases the requirement for both data transferring and storage capacity. We 

validate the method in both theoretically and experimentally, with applications for real -

time classification and recognition tasks of different scenes . Essentially, HyPIS 

achieves similar spectral task perception through purely optical encoding, but it 

elimi nates the need for any training dataset while enabling real -time pixel -by -pixel 

spectral tasks. This work provides a simplified hyperspectral phasor imaging method 

without acquiring the tremendous 3D hyperspectral image data and the use of complex 

processing algorithms for spectral task s. Moreover, our method can be easily adapted 

for other wavebands, such as near -infrared, mid -infrared, and terahertz. 

Principle                  

> Fig. 1 .Schematic illustrating how HyPIS mimics human vision to enable hyperspectral image
> classification. a, The process of human visual perception. Cone cells are mainly responsible for color
> vision, while rod cells are primarily responsible for detecting shapes and movement in dim environments.
> The brain makes decisions based on the information transmitted fr om the retina. b, Biomimetic
> hyperspectral image classification process of HyPIS. Cos -encod er and sin -encod er convert spectral
> signals into a single point in the phasor plot, functioning s imilarly to cone cells in the retina and
> responsible for processing spectral information. SPI reconstructs the spatial information of objects,
> analogous to the role of cone cells in the retina. Cos -encod er : a nencoder performs wavelength -dependent
> cosine -encod ing; Sin -encod er : a n encoder performs wavelength -dependent sine -encod ing; SPD: single -
> pixel detector. c, The perceiving results of an object, derived from human visual recognition and cerebral
> processing. Two colors with similar spectra fail to be classified. d,Classification results of the same
> object when using HyPIS. Two colors with similar spectra can be recognized and classified.

Humans possess multisensory capabilities that enable them to perceive and 

understand complex and dynamic environments, with visual information accounting for 

a substantial portion of the brain’s information -processing resources [47] . As illustrated 

in Fig. 1a, external visual scenes characterized by spatial, spectral, and temporal dimensions are captured by the eyes and conveyed to the retina for early -stage neural 

processing [48] . During this process, cone photoreceptors mediate high -acuity and 

trichromatic color vision through three spectrally distinct cone types, whereas rod 

photoreceptors primarily support highly sensitive luminance perception under low -light 

(scotopic) conditi ons and contribute indirectly to motion processing via magnocellular 

pathways [49] . Subsequently, higher -level visual and associative cortical areas integrate 

the retinal signals to support perception, decision -making, and the accumulation of 

visual experience. In this respect, the hyperspectral information -processing framework 

of HyPIS exhibits a functional resemblance to the hierarchical mechanisms of human 

visual perception. As illustrated in Fig. 1b, HyPIS illuminates an object with a sequence 

of encoding patterns. Tw o optical encoder s perform wavelength‑dependent sine ( Sin -

encod er ) and cosine ( Cos -encod er ) encod ing, recording three sets of intensity values: 

with Cos -encod er , with Sin -encod er , and without any encoding . Using these 

measurements and the known encoding patterns, the Phasor -SPI reconstruction 

algorithm computes the point coordinates (G, S) of the object in a phasor plot. In this 

scheme, the spectral information is convert ed into single phasor points, each 

corresponding to a different color, similar to the color perception function of cone cells. 

At the same time, SPI is used to recognize the shape and motion of objects, functioning 

similarly to the rod cells. By combining hyp erspectral phase analysis with SPI, HyPIS 

achieves compressed sampling in both spatial and spectral dimens ions, allowing 

classification results to be generated directly from the reconstructed G and S values, 

eliminating the need for full 3D hyperspectral data. It is worth noting that HyPIS 

outperforms human vision in classification tasks. Through comprehensive spectral 

coverage and precise spectral analysis, it can extract deeper environmental information. 

As shown in Figs. 1c and 1d, even when two spectrally similar colors cannot be 

distinguished by the human eye, HyPIS can achieve perfect recognition, enablin g the 

identification of metameric colors. 

Results and discussion 

Demonstration of HyPIS for c lassification with public datasets 

To demonstrate the concept of HyPIS , we first performed numerical verification with 

simulation data. We first conducted a comparison between the hyperspectral image 

classification process of HyPIS and the traditional hyperspectral image classification 

process. Figure 2a illustrates the hype rspectral image classification process of HyPIS. 

It can directly achieve hyperspectral image classification by compressed processing 

spatial -spectral 2D information based on phasor and SPI, which is a sensing and 

computing integrated device. The first line in Fig. S1 shows the processing flow of 

HyPIS. In HyPIS, a structured light field first enables spatially encoded illumination of 

the object, while an inexpensive single -pixel detector (SPD) collects the total intensity 

of the object after secondary encod ing (i.e., spectral encoding of the total light intensity), 

as shown in Fig. S1a. Using the reconstruction algorithm proposed herein (see 

“Principles of HyPIS”), two images representing the G and S coordinate maps in the 

phasor plot are reconstructed, as d epicted in the left panel of Fig. S1b. The right panel 

of Fig. S1b visualizes the storage usage for storing these two maps, where blue indicates unused memory and orange denotes used memory, clearly demonstrating the minimal 

storage requirement of HyPIS. Leveraging the reconstructed G and S images, the 

object’s representation in the phasor plot is obtained, as shown in Fig. S1c. 

Classification is t hen directly achieved by partitioning regions based on coordinate 

positions in the phasor plot, without requiring additional classification algorithms. For 

comparison, Figure 2b illustrates the traditional hyperspectral image classification 

process. As des cribed above, traditional hyperspectral image classification employs a 

“capture -storage -compute” distributed framework. It involves imaging using a

hyperspectral camera, storing the data in memory, and using algorithms to perform 

post -processing. The secon d line in Fig. S1 shows the processing flow of the traditional 

method. A hyperspectral camera is used to probe the scene of interest, as shown in Fig. 

S1d. The acquired 3D hyperspectral data are then stored, depicting the collected 

hyperspectral dataset (l eft) and its memory footprint (right), as shown in Fig. S1e. 

Notably, the storage requirement is 𝑁 2⁄ times that of HyPIS, where 𝑁 denotes the 

number of spectral bands. Classification is achieved using dedicated hyperspectral 

classification algorithms, as shown in Fig. S1f. By contrast, HyPIS offers three key 

advantages: 1) compressed sampling, 2) lower storage capacity, and 3) direct 

classification. 

To quantitatively assess the performance of HyPIS, we utilized HyPIS to conduct 

simulations on public hyperspectral datasets, as shown in Fig. 2c -e. The CAVE 

dataset [50] , which captured 31 -band multispectral images at a resolution of 64×64 in the 

wavelength range of 400 -700 nm at 10 nm intervals, is used as the hyperspectral data. 

In order to ensure consistency with the spectral range of the public datasets, we simulate 

a set of sine and cosine encoders operating in the 400 -700 nm wavelength range, as 

shown in Fig. S2. The hyperspectral raw data are shown within the green dashed box 

in Figs. 2c -e. The reconstructed images of G and S (64×64 resolution) for these 

simulated s amples, obtained using the HyPIS method under a 100% sampling rate, are 

shown within the pink dashed box in Figs. 2c -e. Within the orange dashed box are 

displayed the reconstructed phasor plots for each dataset. The simulated objects are 

represented as coo rdinate point sets in the phasor spectral plots, where point sets of the 

same color indicate that the objects have similar spectral curves. Based on this 2D 

phasor plot, direct classification of hyperspectral images can be achieved through 

geometric partit ioning. The classification results for each object are shown within the 

blue dashed box in Figs. 2c -e, where the same color in the plot indicates objects of the 

same class, which is essentially determined by the spectral. It should be noted that 

HyPIS does not require acquiring 3D hyperspectral data of the scene under test during 

practical operation. The raw data within the green dashed box are used to simulate an 

object with spectral information . These simulation results demonstrate that the stored 

data vo lume is reduced to 1/15.5 of the raw data. This substantial data reduction 

efficiency not only minimizes storage and computational burdens but also facilitates 

real -time processing in resource -constrained environments, such as portable imaging 

devices or r emote sensing systems .Fig. 2. Comparison between the HyPIS and the traditional method hyperspectral image classification process.     

> a, Schematic illustration of the hyperspectral image classification process of HyPIS , which realizes the compressed
> processing of spatial -spectral 2D information, and directly achieves hyperspectral image classification. b, Traditional
> hyperspectral image classification process involves imaging using hyperspectral camera, storing a large 3D dataset,
> and performing post -processing with algorithms. Simulation classification results of HyPIS on public datasets: c,
> Thread spools; d, Balloons; e, Fake and real food.

Experimental setup of HyPIS 

The experimental setup of our system is shown in Fig. 3a. A white LED is used as 

the light source. A high -speed digital micro -mirror device (DMD) generates a series of 

orthogonally discrete cosine modulation patterns that would project on the object plane. 

The light from the object, after passing the collecting lens, is detected by three single -

pixel detectors (SPDs), which enables the simultaneous detection of three light beams. 

The first SPD serves as the reference detector and detects the light intensiti es without 

any optical encod ing, while the other two detect them after the spectral modulation of the sine encoding (Sin -encoding ) and cosine encoding (Cos -encoding ), respectively. 

By correlating the modulation patterns and the three groups of measured single -pixel 

intensities, the 2D phasor plot of the object can be reconstructed. Conventional methods 

typically acquire spectral data using detector arrays, such as li ne -array detectors 

commonly employed in commercial spectrometers, as shown in Fig. 3b. In comparison, 

HyPIS encodes the spectra into the phasor domain with two custom -built encoder s. The 

tr ansmission spectra of the ideal encoder s are shown in Fig. 3(c) and (d), which exhibit 

cosine and sine profiles in the 400 -600 nm range. Then, each spectrum is spectrally 

encoded with such optical encod ers during the measurement process. After the 

detection of SPDs, the phasor coordinates of these spectra can be directly acquired, as 

shown in Fig. 3e. All the measured spectra would be represented as unique point 

locations within the circular range, whose bo undary corresponds to the narrowband 

spectra in the range of 400 -600 nm. More simulation results can be found in Fig. S 3.

Therefore, the application of such spectral phasor encoding enables the classification 

of different spectra, which correspond to different regions of objects, without acquiring 

the entire spectral dataset, but only three single -point measurements.                

> Fig. 3 .Experimental setup of HyPIS and characterization of the optical encoder s. a, Schematic of
> the experimental setup. DMD: digital micromirror device; BS: beam splitter; SPD: single -pixel detector.
> b, Illustration of traditional methods that measure the spectra of an object with a spectrometer with a
> line -array detector. c-d, Transmission spectra of the ideal phasor encoder s, with the shape of cosine and
> sine, respectively. e, Phasor representation of the ideal encoder sand different spectra of the object ( f) are
> coded into unique positions within the phasor domain. g-h, Transmission spectra of the cosine and sine
> encoder s used in this work. i, Phasor representation of the used encoder sand the spectra from the object .

For convenience, here we adopt two generalized phasor encod er s in the experiments, 

whose transmission spectra are presented in Figs. 3(g) and (h) were calibrated with a commercial spectrometer with 0.2 nm resolution. Though these spectra deviate from 

the ideal cosine or sine profiles, the phasor analysis and presentation can still be 

performed, as shown in Fig. 3i. The unknown spectra can also be represented within 

the el lipse -like phasor boundary. It should be noted that the 2D phasor plot can be 

further corrected into the circular representation using a correction factor (Fig. S 4). 

However, the uncorrected elliptical phasor plot still exhibits clear representations, 

whic h are directly used in the following experiments without further correction. 

Experimental results 

HyPIS for Hyperspectral Image Classification                   

> Fig. 4 .Demonstration of HyPIS with a transmission object. a, Photograph of the used object, which
> is a four -leaf clover -like tran smission mask .b, Reconstructed images of G and S components,
> respectively, where the two intensity values of each spatial location serve as the coordinates of its phasor
> point in c.d, Classification result according to phasor locations .e,Spectra of four areas measured using
> a spectrometer under three conditions: with Sin -encod er , with Cos -encod er , and without any encoder. f,
> 2D phasor plot of the measured spectra in e.g,Reconstructed pseudo -color image using HyPIS. h, (Ⅰ):
> The 3D hyperspectral data that was constructed by combining the spectral data measured by a
> spectrometer with the images reconstructed by traditional SPI; (Ⅱ): synthesized pseudo -color image .

To demonstrate HyPIS, we first performed the experiments with a four -leaf clover -

like transmission object. Figure 4a shows the photo image of the used object that was 

stuck with different color filters, and also a simplified experimental procedure shown 

in the right part. The reconstructed images corresponding to the G and S dimensions in 

the phasor plot are presented in Fig. 4b, in which the intensities range from -1 to 1. 

Then the intensity values of each spatial pixel define the coordinates of its locations in 

the phasor domain in Fig. 4c. The average coordinate values corresponding to th e four 

parts are ( -0.1 6±0.02, 0.09 ±0.0 2), (0.09 ±0.02, 0.3 1±0.01), (0.60 ±0.0 3, 0.3 4±0.0 2), and (0.2 8±0.02, -0.15 ±0.0 3), respectively. The different spatial locations with similar 

spectral characteristics, shown in the square regions in Fig. 4b, are clustered within 

neighboring areas denoted by the dashed circles in Fig. 4c. This clustering behavior 

demonstrates the effec tive spectral discrimination of different regions within the sample. 

Based on this, we can directly obtain the classification results of the hyperspectral 

image of the target from the two graphs, G and S. Figure 4d shows the class ification 

result , in which the four regions are divided into four classes, each of which has the 

same transmission spectra. It is worth noting that the classification results obtained 

through HyPIS are fully consistent with those of the traditional approach, which first 

acquires complete spectral information and then applies algorithms for classification. 

In order to verify th is, we employed a spectrometer to measure the spectra of four 

distinct heart -shaped regions on the sample. Spectral data were acquired for each 

location under three conditions: with Sin -encod er , Cos -encoder , and without any 

encoder . The measurement results are presented in Fig. 4e, where subpanels (I) -(IV) 

correspond to the spectral profiles of the upper -left (Number 1), lower -left (Number 2), 

upper -right (Number 3), and lower -right (Number 4) regions of target, respectively. 

Leveraging the phasor analysis algorithm, we calculated the coordinates of the phasor 

points associated with these four sets of spectral curves. The computed results are 

shown in Fig. 4f, with the phasor point coordinates for the upper -left (Number 1), lower -

left (Number 2), upper -right (Number 3), and lower -right (Number 4) heart -shaped 

regions of the four -leaf clover being (−0.15, 0.09), (0.10, 0.30), (0.61, 0.34), and (0.31, 

−0.16), respectively. It can be seen that the results obtained from HyPIS are basically 

consistent with those o f spectral phasor analysis, which uses the data measured by the 

spectrometer. These results highlight the efficiency and simplicity of the proposed 

HyPIS method. 

HyPIS achieves hyperspectral image classification through compressive sampling in 

spectral -spatial domain . It uses phasor encoding to map 1D spectral data to different 

points in the phasor plot, with each point corresponding to a specific color defined by 

the color space, and then employs SPI to process and reconstruct the spatial information 

of the object. T his unique approach not only enables HyPIS to perform hyperspectral 

image classification directly but also to reconstruct high -quality full -color image s of 

the target object. Figure 4(g) shows the reconstructed color image. For comparison, we 

reconstructed the hyperspectral image using a simplified approach by combining the 

spectra data with the images obtained by single -pixel imaging, as shown in Fig. 4 h(I). 

Then, we synthesized pseudo -color using the CIE standard color synthesis method (Fig. 

4h(II)), and it can be seen that this color is very close to the reconstructed image in Fig. 

4(g). Notably, the data volume used by conventional approaches for colo r image 

reconstruction or image classification is 500 times that of the HyPIS scheme, 

consuming much more memory resources. More comparison of memory usage can be 

found in Fig. S5. Moreover, we validated the performance of HyPIS under different 

light distr ibutions and detector gains, with the experimental results shown in Fig. S6. 

The results indicate that the hyperspectral phasor imaging and classification outcomes 

of HyPIS are not affected by the light distribution of the source or the detector gain 

level . Further simulations and experiments with the colorimetric card can be found in Figs. S7 and S8 in the Supporting Information. Thus, our experimental and simulation 

results indicate that HyPIS achieves hyperspectral image classification and high -

fidelity full -color images by performing compressed sampling and reconstruction 

simultaneo usly in both spatial and spectral dimensions, reducing data storage by two 

orders of magnitude. 

Fig. 5. Demonstration of HyPIS for real -time hyperspectral phasor imaging and classification. a ,

Illustration of HyPIS for real -time imaging. The encoded patterns were projected onto the moving object, 

where a black arrow indicates the direction of the object's motion. A beam -splitting detection (BSD) 

system is adopted to acquire the spectral encoded light intensities. b, Schematic diagram of the BSD. c,

Photograph of the experimental setup, in which the object is mounted on a rotating stage. d, 2D phasor 

plot of the six different objects that have different transmission spectra. e, Statistics of G and S values in 

the phas or domain for the six different objects, along with their standard deviations. f. Classification 

results of the objects and the background, showing in different colors. g, Reconstructed pseudo -colored 

images using HyPIS. h, Transmission spectra of the two example objects that have slight differences in 

the spectral profiles .

To demonstrate the classification performance of HyPIS in dynamic motion scenarios, we further conducted the experiments for real -time imaging. As illustrated in 

Fig. 5a, the object used in this experiment is a dynamic rotating mask consisting of six 

transmission objects, each with a distinct shape and spectral transmittance. A compact 

beam -splitting detection system is applied for the spectral phasor encoded detection, as 

pres ented in Fig s. 5b and 5 c. Using HyPIS, we reconstructed 160 frames of the dynamic 

scene with a size of 64 × 64 pixels and the frame rate of approximately 2.68 fps. 

Figures. S 9 display s 20 frames of reconstructed images from the G and S videos. The 

acquired 2 D phasor plots of the six objects are shown in Fig. 5d, in which identical 

objects across each frame are consistently mapped. Figure 5e presents the averaged G 

and S values of the phasor coordinates for each object, along with their standard 

deviations. We then performed the image classification, based on the spectral features 

shown on the phasor plot. Figure 5f shows 20 example frames with an interval of 2.98 

seconds between each frame, demonstrating that the objects with in the scene are 

categorized into s ix classes. Figure 5g further presents the reconstructed pseudo -color 

images. The video synthesized from these 20 frames is presented in Video S1 of the 

Supporting Information. 

A gradient of decreasing illumination intensity from the lower -left to lower -right 

corner is evident in the red circle across Frames 1 -4 in Fig . 5g. The intensity of the red 

circle in Frame 4 decreased due to low illumination intensity. However, such non -

uniform illumination had no discernible impact on classification results in Fig. 5f. 

Similarly, the purple star in Frames 16 -18 of Fig . 5g, marked by orange dashed circles, 

becomes visually imperceptible, nearly imperceptible. It is still classified as a di stinct 

category in the corresponding results of Fig. 5f, demonstrating that HyPIS can robustly 

segment and classify objects even under extremely low visibility conditions. Moreover, 

the feet in frames 4 -12 and the smiling face in frames 13 -20 of Fig. 5g exhibit the same 

yellow -green chromaticity, which makes direct classification by these color images 

unfeasible. However, the 2D phasor plot (Fig. 5d) clearly supports their classification, 

as confirmed by the classification results in Fig. 5f, where the feet and smiling face are 

labeled in green and pink, respectively. The corresponding transmission spectra (Fig. 

5h) reveal subtle spectral differences that lead to distinct phasor coordinates (labels 2 

and 4 in Fig. 5d). This highlights HyPIS’s effectiveness in hyperspectral imaging –based 

classification and its capacity to differentiate metameric objects with similar apparent 

colors, underscoring a fundamental advantage of hyperspectral imaging techniques. 

HyPIS for Scene Recognition 

Another advantage of HyPIS is its potential for compact and lightweight hardware 

design, enabling easy integration into mobile platforms such as UAVs for real -time 

hyperspectral classification and object recognition (Fig. 6(a)). HyPIS can be further 

extended to not only achieve classification based on hyperspectral phasor imaging but 

also the recognition tasks based on the pre -calibrated phasor database. HyPIS can be 

extended to perform both hyperspectral phasor imaging –based classification and object 

recog nition using a pre -calibrated phasor database (See Fig. S1 0 in the Supplementary 

Information for more details about the classification and recognition process), as shown 

in Fig. 6. Fig ures 6b and 6c show the experimental setup and the used object (an Anthurium leaf). 

Fig. 6. Demonstration of HyPIS with a leaf as the object. a, Illustration of HyPIS deployed on a small 

unmanned aerial vehicle. b, Photograph of the HyPIS experimental setup in the reflective configuration. 

c, Photograph of the object —an Anthurium leaf. The right image shows the illuminated detection area 

(~2.2 cm × 2.2 cm). d, Measured reference spectra at selected points labeled in (c). e, Referenced spectral 

phasor plot of the object, derived from data in (d). f, 2D phasor plot retrieved by HyPIS. g, Enl arged 

view of the red dashed region in (f). h, Classification result obtained using HyPIS. i & j, Segmented 

regions corresponding to the leaf and stem areas indicated in (c). 

We first measured the spectra corresponding to the positions of 20 points, as indicated 

in Fig. 6c, using a commercial spectrometer. The corresponding results are shown in 

Fig. 6d, with labels 1 –10 representing points on the stem and labels 11 –20 representing 

points on the leaves. Using the traditional phasor algorithm, the spectral phasor fingerprints of the Anthurium were calculated (Fig. 6e), revealing two distinct clusters 

corresponding to stems and leaves due to their spectral differences. Figure 6f shows the 

2D phasor plot obtained by HyPIS, where each point represents a point location of the 

detected area. Figure 6g provides an enlarged view of the red dashed region in Fig. 6f, 

where the cyan and green dashed denotes the stem and leaf regions, based on the pre -

calibrated data in Fig. 6e. Based on this, the positions of the stem part an d the leaf part 

can be classified and recognized. The classification results are shown in Fig. 6h, and 

Figs. 6i and 6j present the recognized leaf and stem areas, respectively. These results 

closely match the corresponding regions in Fig. 6c, demonstrating that HyPIS can 

effectively perform classification and recognition based on hyperspectral phasor 

imaging. 

Conclusion 

In this work, we present HyPIS, a hyperspectral phasor imaging system using single -

pixel detectors that enables direct spectral task -oriented without acquiring the full 

hyperspectral datacube. It achieves compression sampling in the spatial dimension 

through structured illumination and in the spectral dimension using wavelength -

dependent sine and cosine encoding , enabling simultaneous compression in both spatial 

and spectral dimensions, reducing the amount of data obtained by up to two orders of 

magnitude . Owing to this dual -domain compression, HyPIS significantly reduces data 

throughput and system complexity while preserving discriminative information 

required for spectral task . We verified the effectiveness of the proposed method with 

both transmission and reflective objects and demonstrated the dynamic imaging of 

HyPIS to classify six different objects, including metameric targets, at 2.68 fps. In 

addition, HyPIS is extended to perform object recognition based on a pre -calibrated 

spectral phasor database, as demonstrated using a plant target, highlighting its 

capability for data -efficient processing without spectral acquisition. 

Our work demonstrates that HyPIS is a task -oriented sensing strategy, which aligns 

with recent advances in intelligent spectral machine vision, where spectral inference is 

performed directly within the sensing hardware without generating full hyper spectral 

3D data cubes [19] . HyPIS realizes this paradigm through optical encoding, and further 

extends it to a single -pixel architecture. In the future, researchers can achieve HyPIS -

like spectral task devices by designing metasurfaces [51] , low -dimensional materials [52] ,

and photodetectors [53 , 54 ] with Phasor encoding or optical responses. Moreover, it can 

be readily integrated with deep neural networks [5 5, 56] to support high -resolution 

inference under extreme measurement constraints, and can be extended to invisible 

spectral bands such as the near -infrared and terahertz regimes. We anticipate that HyPIS 

will open new opportunities for the development of portable, low -cost, and energy -

efficient spectral task sensing platforms, particularly for applications where hardware 

simplicity and real -time decision -making are critical. 

Methods 

Principles of HyPIS 

In SPI, an object 𝑂 (𝑥 0, 𝑦 0) is illuminated sequentially by 𝑁 encoding patterns 𝑃 𝑖 (𝑥 0, 𝑦 0) , the total intensities 𝑦 𝑖 of the corresponding total reflected or 

transmitted light, measured by an SPD, can be expressed as: 

𝑦 𝑖 = ∑ 𝑃 𝑖 (𝑥 0, 𝑦 0) ∙ 𝑂 (𝑥 0, 𝑦 0)𝑥 0,𝑦 0 , (1) 

where 𝑖 = 1, 2, 3 ∙∙∙, 𝑁 is the index of the pattern, and 𝑥 0 and 𝑦 0 are spatial coordinates. 

It should be noted that 𝑦 𝑖 contains the spectral response of the object to the entire light 

source spectrum. When filtering the light intensity through an ideal narrowband filter 

(with a central wavelength of 𝜆 1), the total intensities 𝑦 𝑖 equals the total light intensity 

𝑦 𝜆 1 of the object secondarily encoded at 𝜆 1. Therefore, 𝑦 𝑖 can be expressed as: 

𝑦 𝑖 = 𝑦 𝜆 1 . (2) 

When the narrowband filter has two central wavelengths of 𝜆 1 and 𝜆 2 , the total 

intensities 𝑦 𝑖 equals the sum of the light intensities of the object secondarily encoded 

at each of these two wavelengths. It can be expressed as: 

𝑦 𝑖 = 𝑦 𝜆 1 + 𝑦 𝜆 2 . (3) 

When no filters are used, the total intensity 𝑦 𝑖 can be also expressed as: 

𝑦 𝑖 = ∑ 𝑦 𝜆𝑖 (𝜆 )𝜆 , (4) 

where 𝜆 denotes the wavelength range covered by the light source. Eq. 4 denotes that 

the intensity value equals the sum of intensities of the object at different wavelengths 

encoded by the patterns. This theory provides theoretical support for implementing a 

hype rspectral imaging scheme based on a single -pixel detector through spatial -spectral 

dual -dimensional encoding. 

Different from traditional SPI, HyPIS not only reconstructs the spatial information 

of objects but also directly enables hyperspectral image classification. In HyPIS, three 

sets of intensity values are recorded: with the Cos -encod er , with the Sin -encod er , and 

without encod er . According to Eq. 4, when the Cos -encod er is placed in front of the 

single -pixel detector to work as a spectral encoder, the total intensit y 𝑦 𝑖𝑐𝑜𝑠 can be 

expressed as: 

𝑦 𝑖𝑐𝑜𝑠 = ∑ 𝑦 𝑖𝜆 (𝜆 )𝜆 ∙ 𝐼 𝑐𝑜𝑠 (𝜆 ), (5) 

where 𝐼 𝑐𝑜𝑠 (𝜆 ) represents the transmittance curve of cos -encod er . To retrieve the image 

𝑂 (𝑥 0, 𝑦 0)𝑐𝑜𝑠 after passing through the cos -encod er , a compressive sensing algorithm is 

used . Assume the image 𝑂 (𝑥 0, 𝑦 0)𝑐𝑜𝑠 has a sparse representation under a 2D discrete 

cosine transform (2D -DCT) basis: 

𝑂 (𝑥 0, 𝑦 0)𝑐𝑜𝑠 = ∑ 𝑠 𝑢 ,𝑣 ∙ 𝜓 𝑢 ,𝑣 (𝑥 0, 𝑦 0)𝑢 ,𝑣 , (6) 

where 𝜓 𝑢 ,𝑣 (𝑥 0, 𝑦 0) is the 2D -DCT basis function and 𝑠 𝑢 ,𝑣 are the sparse coefficients. 

Then, the image is reconstructed by solving the following optimization problem: 

a𝑟𝑔 min s 

> 1
> 2

∑ (yicos − ∑ Pi(x0, y0) ∙ ∑ su,v𝜓 𝑢 ,𝑣 (x0, y0)u,vx0,y0 )2N 

> i=1

+ λ ∑ |su,v|u,v , (7) 

where 𝜆 > 0 is is th e regularization parameter controlling the sparsity strength, and |⋅|

denotes the absolute value. After solving this optimization problem to obtain the 

optimal sparse coefficients 𝑠 𝑢 ,𝑣 , the image 𝑂 (𝑥 0, 𝑦 0)𝑐𝑜𝑠 can be obtained according to 

Eq. 6. 

There is an analogous reconstruction process for retrieving the image encod ed by the 

Sin -encod er 𝑂 (𝑥 0, 𝑦 0)𝑠𝑖𝑛 and the un encode d image 𝑂 (𝑥 0, 𝑦 0). Then, with the help of 

phasor analysis, the point coordinates 𝐺 (𝑥 0, 𝑦 0) and 𝑆 (𝑥 0, 𝑦 0) of the object 𝑂 (𝑥 0, 𝑦 0)in the phasor plot can be obtained with: 

𝐺 (𝑥 0, 𝑦 0) = 2 ∗ 

> 𝑂 (𝑥 0,𝑦 0)𝑐𝑜𝑠
> 𝑂 (𝑥 0,𝑦 0)−𝐼 𝑐𝑜𝑠 −𝑚𝑖𝑛
> 𝐼 𝑐𝑜𝑠 −𝑚𝑎𝑥 −𝐼 𝑐𝑜𝑠 −𝑚𝑖𝑛

− 1, (8) 

𝑆 (𝑥 0, 𝑦 0) = 2 ∗ 

> 𝑂 (𝑥 0,𝑦 0)𝑠𝑖𝑛
> 𝑂 (𝑥 0,𝑦 0)−𝐼 𝑠𝑖𝑛 −𝑚𝑖𝑛
> 𝐼 𝑠𝑖𝑛 −𝑚𝑎𝑥 −𝐼 𝑠𝑖𝑛 −𝑚𝑖𝑛

− 1, (9) 

where 𝐼 𝑐𝑜𝑠 −𝑚𝑎𝑥 and 𝐼 𝑐𝑜𝑠 −𝑚𝑖𝑛 are the the maximum and minimum transmittance 

values of the Cos -encod er respectively, and 𝐼 𝑠𝑖𝑛 −𝑚𝑎𝑥 and 𝐼 𝑠𝑖𝑛 −𝑚𝑖𝑛 are the the 

maximum and minimum transmittance values of the Sin -encoding respectively. Finally, 

using this theory, we can obtain the whole phasor plot of the object .

Experimental apparatus 

A white LED (GCI -060411, Daheng Optics) is used as the light source, with the 

illumination light in the range of 400 -600 nm that is filtered by a bandpass (MEFH10 -

600SP, LBTEK) . The light source is first shaped into collimated parallel light through 

a lens (GCL -M010158N, Daheng Optics) and illuminates a high -speed DMD (GmbH 

V-7001, ViALUX) , generating a series of orthogonally grayscale modulation patterns 

with a refresh rate of 22.0 kHz. We use the spatial dithering method to generate the 

patterns via DMD , as shown in Fig. S11 . The patterns feat ure a 64 × 64 superpixel 

resolution. Each superpixel contains 12 × 12 micromirrors, spanning the central 

768 × 768 pixels of the DMD. A lens L1 (MAD507 -AB, LBTEK) is used to project 

the encoding patterns onto the object plane. Then, the light focused by a lens L2 

(MAD508 -AB, LBTEK) , resulting from the interaction with the object, including 

transmission, reflection, and scattering, is successively split using a beam splitting 

detection (BSD) system. This system consists of two beam splitters (BS1 (BS2137 -A, 

LBTEK) and BS2 (BS2155 -A, LBTEK) ) and three SPD s (PDAPC2, Thorlabs) , which 

enable the simultaneous detectio n of the intensities of three light beams. Three SPDs 

are placed in three optical paths, respectively, to collect the light intensity. A data 

acquisition module (USB -6353, National Instruments) synchronizes the DMD and SPD 

to achieve data acquisition. 

The experimental samples used in Fig . 5 and Fig. 6 were fabricated by stamping a 

pattern onto black paper using a press stamp. For Fig. 5, the patterned regions were 

hollowed out to permit light transmission, forming a four -leaf clover shape, whereas 

the non -patterned areas blocked light passage. Subsequently, four distinct color filters 

were individually affixed behind the hollowed sections of the four -leaf clover. For Fig. 

6, we used six differently shaped stamps to imprint patterns onto a circular black 

turntable. Then, we attached six distinct colored filters behind the hollowed patterns of 

the stamps to create the experimental sample. In the experiment, the turntable was 

driven by a compact rotary mount (DDR25/M, Thorlabs). 

Acknowledgements 

This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China 

(62503032, U23A20481, 62275010, 62573029), and the China Postdoctoral Science 

Foundation (2025M780804). We are grateful to the Atomic -Scale In Situ Fabrication Platform of the Analysis & Testing Center of Beihang University for the facilities, and 

the scientific and technical assistance. 

Data availability 

All data supporting the findings of this study are available within the article and its 

Supplementary Information files and from the corresponding authors upon reasonable 

request. 

Additional information 

Supplementary information: Please refer to the supporting documents 

Code availability 

All code will be provided upon request to the authors. Please address your requests for 

data and code to the corresponding authors. 

Competing interests 

The authors declare no competing interests. 

References 

[1] BIAN L, WANG Z, ZHANG Y, et al. A broadband hyperspectral image sensor with high spatio -

temporal resolution [J]. Nature, 2024, 635(8037): 73. 

[2] LU B, DAO P D, LIU J, et al. Recent Advances of Hyperspectral Imaging Technology and 

Applications in Agriculture [J]. Remote Sens, 2020, 12(16): 2659 .

[3] BLOCHET B, LEBAS N, BERTO P, et al. Single -shot hyperspectral wavefront imaging [J]. Nat 

Commun, 2025, 17(1): 137. 

[4] XIONG J, CAI X, CUI K, et al. Dynamic brain spectrum acquired by a real -time ultraspectral 

imaging chip with reconfigurable metasurfaces [J]. Optica, 2022, 9(5): 461 -468 .

[5] BHARGAVA A, SACHDEVA A, SHARMA K, et al. Hyperspectral imaging and its applications: A 

review [J]. Heliyon, 2024, 10(12): e33208. 

[6] WANG Y, BRAGHIERE R K, FISCHER W W, et al. Impacts of leaf traits on vegetation optical 

properties in Earth system modeling [J]. Nat Commun, 2025, 16(1): 4968. 

[7] YUAN T, RIOBO L, GASPARIN F, et al. Phase -shifting optothermal microscopy enables live -cell 

mid -infrared hyperspectral imaging of large cell populations at high confluency [J]. Sci Adv, 2024, 10(8): 

eadj7944. 

[8] MEHL P M, CHEN Y -R, KIM M S, et al. Development of hyperspectral imaging technique for the 

detection of apple surface defects and contaminations [J]. J Food Eng, 2004, 61(1): 67. 

[9] PARK J, CHOI Y, KWON S, et al. Microsphere -assisted hyperspectral imaging: super -resolution, 

non -destructive metrology for semiconductor devices [J]. Light Sci Appl, 2024, 13(1): 122. 

[10] MENG H, GAO Y, WANG X, et al. Quantum dot -enabled infrared hyperspectral imaging with 

single -pixel detection [J]. Light Sci Appl, 2024, 13(1): 121. 

[11] GARY SHAW, MANOLAKIS D. Signal processing for hyperspectral image exploitation [J]. IEEE 

Signal Process Mag, 2002, 19(1): 12. 

[12] MANIFOLD B, MEN S, HU R, et al. A versatile deep learning architecture for classification and label -free prediction of hyperspectral images [J]. Nat Mach Intell, 2021, 3(4): 306. 

[13] LI Y, LUO Y, ZHANG L, et al. MambaHSI: Spatial –Spectral Mamba for Hyperspectral Image 

Classification [J]. IEEE Trans Geosci Remote Sens, 2024, 62 , 5524216 .

[14] VOGELSTEIN J T, BRIDGEFORD E W, TANG M, et al. Supervised dimensionality reduction for 

big data [J]. Nat Commun, 2021, 12(1): 2872. 

[15] LANDGREBE D. Hyperspectral image data analysis [J]. IEEE Signal Process Mag, 2002, 19(1): 

17. 

[16] YOSHIDA K, TOYOIZUMI T. A biological model of nonlinear dimensionality reduction [J]. Sci 

Adv, 2025, 11(6): eadp9048. 

[17] ABID A, ZHANG M J, BAGARIA V K, et al. Exploring patterns enriched in a dataset with 

contrastive principal component analysis [J]. Nat Commun, 2018, 9(1): 2134. 

[18] CHEN M, CHENG R, HE J, et al. SMOPCA: spatially aware dimension reduction integrating multi -

omics improves the efficiency of spatial domain detection [J]. Genome Biol, 2025, 26(1): 135. 

[19] ZHANG D, LI Y, GENG J, et al. Spectral kernel machines with electrically tunable photodetectors 

[J]. Science, 2025, 390(6776): eady6571. 

[20] FEREIDOUNI F, BADER A N, GERRITSEN H C. Spectral phasor analysis allows rapid and 

reliable unmixing of fluorescence microscopy spectral images [J]. Opt Express, 2012, 20(12): 12729. 

[21] MALACRIDA L. Phasor plots and the future of spectral and lifetime imaging [J]. Nat Methods, 

2023, 20(7): 965. 

[22] HAN D, ZHENG C, LING Z, et al. Hyperspectral phasor thermography [J]. Cell Rep Phys Sci, 

2025, 6(3): 102501 .

[23] CUTRALE F, TRIVEDI V, TRINH L A, et al. Hyperspectral phasor analysis enables multiplexed 

5D in vivo imaging [J]. Nat Methods, 2017, 14(2): 149. 

[24] DVORNIKOV A, GRATTON E. Hyperspectral imaging in highly scattering media by the spectral 

phasor approach using two filters [J]. Biomed Opt Express, 2018, 9(8): 3503. 

[25] YAO Z, BRENNAN C K, SCIPIONI L, et al. Multiplexed bioluminescence microscopy via phasor 

analysis [J]. Nat Methods, 2022, 19(7): 893 -898 .

[26] HEDDE P N, CINCO R, MALACRIDA L, et al. Phasor -based hyperspectral snapshot microscopy 

allows fast imaging of live, three -dimensional tissues for biomedical applications [J]. Commun Biol, 

2021, 4(1): 721. 

[27] WANG P, KITANO M, KEOMANEE -DIZON K, et al. A single -shot hyperspectral phasor camera 

for fast, multi -color fluorescence microscopy [J]. Cell Rep Methods, 2023, 3(4): 100441 .

[28] STEGEMANN J, GRONIGER F, NEUTSCH K, et al. High -Speed Hyperspectral Imaging for Near 

Infrared Fluorescence and Environmental Monitoring [J]. Adv Sci, 2025, 12(16): e2415238. 

[29] DUARTE M F, DAVENPORT M A, TAKHAR D, et al. Single -pixel imaging via compressive 

sampling [J]. IEEE Signal Process Mag, 2008, 25(2): 83. 

[30] SHAPIRO J H. Computational ghost imaging [J]. Physical Review A, 2008, 78(6): 061802. 

[31] STANTCHEV R I, PHILLIPS D B, HOBSON P, et al. Compressed sensing with near -field THz 

radiation [J]. Optica, 2017, 4(8): 989. 

[32] EDGAR M P, GIBSON G M, PADGETT M J. Principles and prospects for single -pixel imaging [J]. 

Nat Photonics, 2018, 13(1): 13. 

[33] LIU Z, YANG B, ZHANG Y, et al. Comprehensive compensation of real -world degradations for 

robust single -pixel imaging [J]. Light Sci Appl, 2025, 14(1): 365. 

[34] LIU B -L, YANG Z -H, LIU X, et al. Coloured computational imaging with single -pixel detectors based on a 2D discrete cosine transform [J]. J Mod Opt, 2016, 64(3): 259 -264 .

[35] MU J, ZHENG K, MI Y, et al. Ultra‐Broadband Self‐Trapped Exciton Emission of (TPA)2Cu4Br6 

for UV Single‐Pixel Imaging [J]. Laser Photonics Rev, 2025, 20(3): e02218 .

[36] SONG J, LIU B, WANG Y, et al. Computational and dark -field ghost imaging with ultraviolet light 

[J]. Photonics Res, 2024, 12(2): 226 -234 .

[37] WANG Y, WANG Y, LIU T, et al. Real -time mid -infrared single -pixel imaging using a spinning 

mask based on dual detection and enhanced U -Net [J]. Opt Lasers Eng, 2026, 198 : 109530. 

[38] OLBINADO M P, PAGANIN D M, CHENG Y, et al. X -ray phase -contrast ghost imaging using a 

single -pixel camera [J]. Optica, 2021, 8(12): 1538 -1544 .

[39] WANG H, ZHOU C, LI P, et al. High -sensitivity and fast -response solar -blind photodetectors via 

band offset engineering for motion tracking [J]. Nat Commun, 2025, 16(1): 8175. 

[40] LIU B, WANG F, CHEN C, et al. Self -evolving ghost imaging [J]. Optica, 2021, 8 (10), 1340 -1349 .

[41] WANG D, LIU B, SONG J, et al. Dual -mode adaptive -SVD ghost imaging [J]. Opt Express, 2023, 

31(9): 14225 -1423 9.

[42] WANG Y, HUANG K, FANG J, et al. Mid -infrared single -pixel imaging at the single -photon level 

[J]. Nat Commun, 2023, 14(1): 1073. 

[43] RADWELL N, MITCHELL K J, GIBSON G M, et al. Single -pixel infrared and visible microscope 

[J]. Optica, 2014, 1(5): 285. 

[44] LI W, HU X, WU J, et al. Dual -color terahertz spatial light modulator for single -pixel imaging [J]. 

Light Sci Appl, 2022, 11(1): 191. 

[45] XU Y, LU L, SARAGADAM V, et al. A compressive hyperspectral video imaging system using a 

single -pixel detector [J]. Nat Commun, 2024, 15(1): 1456. 

[46] GATTINGER P, KILGUS J, ZORIN I, et al. Broadband near -infrared hyperspectral single pixel 

imaging for chemical characterization [J]. Opt Express, 2019, 27(9): 12666. 

[47] ESSEN D C V, ANDERSON C H. Information Processing in the Primate Visual System: An 

Integrated Systems Perspective [J]. Science, 1992, 255(5043): 419. 

[48] MASLAND R H. The neuronal organization of the retina [J]. Neuron, 2012, 76(2): 266. 

[49] FIELD G D, GAUTHIER J L, SHER A, et al. Functional connectivity in the retina at the resolution 

of photoreceptors [J]. Nature, 2010, 467(7316): 673. 

[50] YASUMA F, MITSUNAGA T, ISO D, et al. Generalized assorted pixel camera: postcapture control 

of resolution, dynamic range, and spectrum [J]. IEEE Trans Image Process, 2010, 19(9): 2241. 

[51] LIAO Z, XUE Z, FAN J, et al. All -optical hybrid metasurfaces for ultrafast computational 

spectrometer and single -pixel imaging [J]. Nat Commun, 2025, 17(1): 888. 

[52] ZHANG G, JIANG H, LAI S, et al. Recent Advancements in Low‐Dimensional Material 

Miniaturized Spectrometers [J]. Adv Funct Mater, 2026 , e29588 .

[53] WANG F, FANG S, ZHANG Y, et al. 2D computational photodetectors enabling multidimensional 

optical information perception [J]. Nat Commun, 2025, 16(1): 6791. 

[5 4] ZHAI L, LIU B, ZHU M , et al., “Miniaturized computational spectrometer enabled by the 

photoelastic effect with adaptive modulation units selection,” Photon Res , 2026 , 14, A73 –A84 .

[5 5] ZHU M, LIU B, WANG Y, et al. Physics -informed neural network enhanced multispectral single -

pixel imaging with a chip spectral detector [J]. Opt Laser Technol, 2026, 194 : 114430. 

[5 6] SONG K, BIAN Y, WANG D, et al. Advances and Challenges of Single‐Pixel Imaging Based on 

Deep Learning [J]. Laser Photonics Rev, 2024, 19(7): 2401397.